Title: 2607.14322v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.14322v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Jul 2026 00:14:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
1

# Interfacial -Thermo -Fluid -Adhesion Dynamics of 

# Evaporating Capillary Bridges between Curved Surfaces 

# Arnov Paul 1, a, * , Subhadeep Mondal 2, and Purbarun Dhar 2, b, * 

> 1

Applied Mechanics Department, Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology Allahabad, 

Uttar Pradesh - 211004, India  

> 2

Hydrodynamics and Thermal Multiphysics Lab (HTML), Department of Mechanical 

Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal – 721302, India 

*Corresponding author : 

> a

E-mail: arnov0381@gmail.com ; b E-mail: purbarun@mech.iitkgp.ac.in 

# Abstract 

We probe the evaporation mechanism , and the associated adhesion dynamics of liquid 

capillary bridges connecting two curved , solid substrates. The coupled thermo -fluid -species 

transport and the transient evolution of capillary adhesion during evaporation are 

system atically examined. A n accurate, fully coupled transient numerical framework is 

developed , wherein the equilibrium capillary profile s are first determined from level set 

method . Next, the evaporation is simulated via Arbitrary Lagrangian -Eulerian (ALE) 

framework to accurately track the moving liquid -vapor interface. The combined influence of 

substrate curvature, surface wettability, and solid ’s thermal conductivity on evaporation and 

capillary adhesion character is comprehensively analysed . The simulatio n methodology is 

robustly validated against published literature for capillary profiles, evaporation rates, and 

capillary forces, demonstrating good agreement. Our results reveal that the evaporation 

characteristics of both hydrophilic and superhydrophobic (SH) liquid bridges are strongly 

governed by substrate ’s curvature and thermal conductivity , and i ncreasing values pose 

favourable condition for augmented interfacial mass transfer rate. The innately non -uniform 

vapour flux generates spatially varying evaporative cooling, producing surface -tension 

gradients that drive internal thermo -capillary circulation. A non -dimensional scaling analysis 

shows that Marangoni flow dominates buoyancy -induced flow throughout. Also , increasing 2

substrate curvature decreases the overall capillary force , owing to the reduced curvature s of 

the liquid bridge, while the temporal evolution of the adhesion force is strongly influenced by 

both substrate curvature and wettability. Our findings offer valuable insights toward s design 

guidelines for evaporation -driven particle assembly, microgravity experiments, precise 

atomic force microscopy, bio -sensors design, additive manufacturing, and niche micro -

fabrication processes, where the dynamic evolution of liquid -bridge geometry and adhesion 

critically determines particle packing, structural integrity, and the consequent microstructure. 

Keywords: capillary bridge, evaporation, substrate curvature, wettabi lity, Marangoni flow, 

Arbitrary Lagrangian -Eulerian (ALE) .

# 1. Introduction 

Capillary bridges ( or liquid bridges) often play fundamental role s in thermo -fluid ic , and 

species transport phenomena between adjacent solid substrates. Th ese structure s are formed 

when a small liquid -mass is partially stretched or squeezed between two solid substrates very 

close to one another , and are relevant to several natural and industrial processes . For instance, 

the transient changes in mechanical properties of unsaturated soil , wet granular matter , and 

porous media greatly depend on their liquid retention capability , which in turn is governed by 

the evaporation behavior of liquid in the form of capillary bridges [1-3]. The hydrodynamics 

and deformation in seepag e flow through unsaturated fractures (in geophysical flow s, and oil 

recovery applications) greatly depend on formation of these bridges [4] . The formation, 

stabilit y, and evaporation of liquid bridges are relevant to several scientific application such 

as printing technology [5] , trickle bed reactors [6] , atomic force microscopy [7] , microgravity 

experiments [8] , dispensing of glue in packaging, leather, rubber and vi nyl industries [9] , heat 

switch system in electronic cooling [10] , and in micro -plating applications [11] . Also, 

evaporati ng capillary bridges play a pivotal role in particle assembly and self -assembly by 

generating capillary forces that drive particle rearrangement and organization into ordered 

micro - and nanostructures, thereby enabling fabrication of functional materials and coatings 

[12 ]. Hence, an in -depth understanding of the interfacial profile evolution and thermo -fluid -

species transport behavior of capillary bridges during evaporation under varied circumstances 

is essential for the rational design and optimization of the aforementioned processes .

Under mechanical equilibrium , the ca pillar y pro file is governed by Young -Laplace 

equation: 0R p G

=  + ; where 

, R0,

P and G represent liquid -gas interfacial surface 3

tension, overall radius of curvature, Laplace pressure , and gravitational effects. Here, the 

geometrical parameter R0 takes into account both gorge and external radius of curvature ; and 

thereby is strongly dictated by the wetting properties of solid surface and solid -liquid bridge 

geometry [13] . For instance, between superhydrophobic (SH) surface s, both external and 

gorge profile becomes convex , thereby result ing in a nodoid -shaped (a hyperbolic roulette) 

bridge ; whereas between hydrophilic surface s a concave gorge and concave external profile 

lead to an unduloidal (an elliptic roulette) bridge profile [14] . Both these profiles , under 

respective positive and negative internal pressure conditions , were experimentally realized by 

Mielniczuk et al [ 15 ] under negligible gravity conditions. In presen ce of gravitational effects ,

the conventional analytical models cannot be employed to solve Young -Laplace equation due 

to redundant boundary conditions , an d in such cases numerical shooting techniques are 

needed [16 ]. Also , the capillary profile also depends on the surface tension at the liquid -gas 

interface, which in turn is governed by the thermal state of the system. For most liquids, the 

surface tension decreases with increasing temperature. Consequently, variations in the 

thermal state (such as arising from external heating or evaporative cooling ) can significantly 

alter the equilibrium capillary profile. 

Th e temporal evolution of capillary profile significantly affect s the evaporative 

transport due to the changing interfacial curvature ; as local variation in the curvature of the 

liquid -vapor interface governs the local vapor concentration gradient in the gaseous domain 

[17] . The solid -liquid -contact geometry, thermo -physical properties, thermal effects, and 

ambient conditions [18 -21] also govern the capillary evolution . For instance , a larger bridge 

height results in an enhanced evaporative mass loss rate due to reduced confinement effects 

[20]. Also , a higher substrate temperature or lower ambient relative humidity substantially 

enhances the evaporation rate, as reported in recent studies [ 18 , 19 ]. These parameters also 

markedly influence the convective transport phenomena within the liquid b ridge. The non -

uniform evaporative mass flux [22] induces uneven evaporative cooling, thereby generating 

internal flow through thermal Marangoni convection or buoyancy -driven advection, similar 

to non -isothermal capillary bridges [23] . Furthermore, confinement effects may significantly 

modify the internal advection dynamics through changes in the evaporation rate, similar to 

sessile droplets [24 ]. Als o, in the presence of external confinement, vortex -induced 

modifications of the gaseou s flow field may further alter the evaporation rate [ 25 ]. Therefore, 

the advection characteristics in both the liquid and gaseous domains play a crucial role in 

determining the overall stability and evaporation behavior of capillary bridges. 4

Moreover, the capillary force in a liquid bridge arises from the combined 

contributions of surface tension and Laplace pressure and is therefore strongl y governed by 

the bridge geometry and wetting characteristics [26, 27] . For a given bridge volume, a 

smaller separatio n distance increases the interfacial curvature, thereby enhancing both the 

Laplace pressure and surface tension contributions acting between the substrates [28] . Also ,

the wettability of the confining surfaces strongly influences the contact angle and cont act 

radius, resulting in predominantly attractive (suction) and repulsive capillary forces for 

hydrophilic and superhydrophobic (SH) surfaces, respectively [17] . Consequently, the bridge 

geometry and wetting state play a pivotal role in determining the mag nitude and direction of 

the capillary force. During evaporation, continuous interfacial mass loss alters the transient 

capillary profile and its characteristic geometrical features, such as the gorge and external 

radii of curvature. These geometric feature s are further affected by the contact line dynamics 

[29 ] which in turn is dictated by the wetting state and curvature of the solid substrates similar 

to sessile droplets [ 30 ]. As a result, during evaporation, the capillary force initially increases 

to a maximum until the onset of pressure instability, beyond which it progressively decreases 

and eventually becomes repulsive (positive gauge pressure) at bridge rupture [28, 29] . Such 

transient variations in capillary force govern particle rear rangement and self -assembly, 

enabling the fabrication of ordered micro - and nanostructures for advanced functional 

materials and coatings. 

The foregoing literature highlights the influential role of solid -liquid geometry in 

governing the capillary profile and evaporation behavior of liquid bridges under varied 

conditions. It also demonstrates the significant effects of surface wettability and the thermo -

physical properties of the solid and liquid phases on the internal thermo -fluidic transport and 

capillar y force dynamics. However, in practical applications, solid substrates are seldom 

perfectly planar, and curved geometries are more commonly encountered. Such substrate 

curvature, together with the wetting state, can substantially modify the equilibrium cap illary 

profile by altering the minimum -energy configuration of the whole system . Furthermore, in 

microgravity experiments involving liquid bridges, the tip material and consequently the 

thermal conductivity of the confining substrates can vary over a wide range, thereby 

influencing the evaporation process. 

Despite their practical significance, only a few studies [28, 29, 31] have considered 

the influence of substrate curvature on the evaporation behavior of liquid bridges. Moreover, 

the coupled effects of evaporative cooling, thermo -fluidic transport, and transient adhesion 5

dynamics have remained largely unexplored . To address these gaps, the present study 

numerically investigates the coupled thermo -fluid -adhesion dynamics of evaporating liquid 

bridges . For this purpose, the capillary profile is numerically obtained using level -set method, 

and the evaporative transport phenomena of liquid bridges are subsequently modeled within 

an Arbitrary Lagrangian -Eulerian (ALE) framework. The coupled effects of sub strate 

curvature under different wettability and thermal conductivity conditions are explored 

systematically . The findings provide fundamental insights for optimizing evaporation -driven 

particle assembly and additive manufacturing processes, where the tran sient evolution of 

liquid -bridge geometry and capillary forces governs particle packing, structural integrity, and 

the resulting microstructure. Furthermore, the mechanistic understanding of evaporation -

driven adhesion dynamics developed in the present stu dy provides a scientific basis for 

improving the quantification of capillary adhesion, tip -sample interaction forces, and 

nanoscale interfacial phenomena in atomic force microscopy (AFM) across a broad range of 

operating conditions [32, 33] .

# 2. Physical system , mathematical description , and computer simulations 

We consider the evaporation phenomenon of a capillary bridge between the curved faces of 

two adjacent cylindrical substrates in a n initially quiescent and isothermal environment . The 

problem involves coupled mass, momentum, and energy transport between the adjacent soli d, 

liquid and gaseous domain s. At initial conditions, the liquid molecules being saturated at the 

liquid -vapor interface diffuse to the surrounding gaseous domain solely due to concentration 

difference. During this process, latent heat is extracted from the interface, resulting in 

evaporative cooling and the development of temperature gradients within both the liquid and 

gaseous phases. These thermal disturbances fu rther propagate into the adjacent solid domains 

through heat conduction . This thermal non -uniformity induces bulk motion in both fluid and 

gaseous domain through thermal Marangoni effects or buoyancy driven advection. Such bulk 

fluid motion may result in internal heat advection thereby the affecting the saturation 

concentration of vapor at the liquid -vapor interface. In other words, the evaporation effect s

i.e., the evaporative cooling and resulting bulk fluid motion directly influences its driving 

mechanism i.e., the interfacial vapor diffusion . As a result , the mass, momentum and energy 

transport processes become strongly coupled and inherently nonlinear . These phenomena 

may further be affected by the system geometry and wetting effects which in tu rn is 

influenced by the thermo -physical properties of participating domains. 6

The physical problem is formulated mathematically in an axisymmetric r-z coordinate 

system, as shown schematically in fig. 1(a ). The liquid bridge is formed between the curved 

faces of two adjacent cylindrical substrates possessing identical curvature, with the contact 

diameter being equal to the substrate diameter, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a, b) . The 

corresponding geometrical speci fications at the interface (such as gorge radius and external 

radius of curvature) and at the contact line (such as contact angle, radius of curvature at solid 

substrate) are illustrated in fig. 1(b). This configuration highlights the intrinsic influence o f

substrate curvature on the internal thermo -fluid dynamics while minimizing its effect on the 

surrounding vapor concentration field. To investigate the role of curvature, the curvature 

magnitude of both the upper and lower substrates is varied over a wide range, as summarized 

in Table 1 . For wettability effects, we consider the solid -liquid contact angle 

 = /4 and 

 =

5/6 representing hydrophilic and SH nature of the surfaces . Furthermore, aluminum (k = 

238 W/m.K ), alumina (k = 27 W/m.K) , glass (k = 1.4 W/m.K) and acrylic plastic (k = 0.18 

W/m.K) are selected as substrate materials to elucidate the influence of solid thermal 

conductivity relative to that of the liquid domain . For all cases, t he initial volume ( V0) and 

axial height ( h) of the water liquid bridge s are considered as 2 l and 0.6mm respectively. For 

the evaporation study, we considered co nstant contact radius (CCR) mode of evaporation i.e., 

the contact lines at the both top and bottom substrate remains fixed while the tran sient contact 

angles decrease consistently . Under these conditions, the evaporative transport phenomena 

are numerically simulated until the bridge volume decreases to 25% and 20% of its initial 

value for  = /4 and  = 5 /6 respectively . Beyond these limits, the contact line de -pins 

with complex stick -slip behavior as reported in previous studies [17, 20, 28, 29 ]. 7

Fig. 1: (a) schematic of the computational domain for evaporation study; (b) geometry 

of the capillary bridge between two spherical substrates; (c) typical distribution of mesh 

structures near liquid -vapor interface. 

Table 1 : Geometrical specification of the substrate curvature considered in present 

study 

Nature of curvature Sl. No. Curve radius ( Rs)

(mm) 

Curvature ( C=Rs-1)

(mm -1)

Flat substrate 0 ∞ C0 = 0 

Curved 1 10 C1 = 0.1 

2 3.333 C2 = 0. 3

3 2 C3 = 0. 5

2.1 Governing Equations: 

2.1.1 Initial equilibrium profile of the capillary bridges: 

The stable profile of capillary bridges at initial state is obtained using level set (LS) method. 

In this approach , we define the level set function 

 as the mass fraction of liquid phase and 

solve the LS equation coupled with the Navier -Stokes equation through the advection 

velocity given as [34 ]: ( ) ( )

1LS ut

         +  =    − −      

(1)( )

# ( )                         

> (.)TLS LS LS LS LS
> uuupI uugt
> +=   − ++  +

(2)

In th ese eqns .LS u denotes the velocity in level set method,  is the parameter controlling 

interfacial thickness,  is the re -initialization velocity and g is the gravitational acceleration. 

Typically,  depends on the mesh size and  is approximated as maximum velocity 

occurring in the computat ion domain. To avoid an abrupt discontinuity of the thermo -physical 

properties at the interface smeared out Heaviside function is used given by ( ) ( )   

> lvl

H

##     = + −

. Here ( )

H

##  is the Heaviside unit step function . These eqns. are 

numerically solved by imposing the equilibrium contact angle as a wett ed wall boundary 

condition for a fixed liquid volume to obtain the stable capillary profile under varied 

conditions . The value corresponds to 0.5 

= always points the position of liquid -vapor 

interface. 8

2.1.2 Evaporative transport phenomena: 

The evaporation behavior of liquid bridge s is physically modelled as mass, momentum and 

energy transfer across the solid, liquid, and gaseous domains . These coupled transport 

phenomena are mathematically modelled using advection -diffusion eqn., continuity and 

Navior -Stokes eqn., and energy eqn. given as:  

( . )c

c u c D ct

 +  =   

(3). 0U =

(4)( )

# ( )                      

> (.)Tc
> UuUpI UUGt
> +=   − ++  +

(5)        

> (.)pc
> TCuTkTt

 +  =     

(6)

Here, c, D, U,

, p,

, Cp, T represent vapor concentration , diffusivity of water vapor ,

velocity, density, pressure, viscosity, specific heat and temperature respectively . It should be 

noted that, in the present study, eqns. (3) -(6) are formulated within an arbitrary Lagrangian -

Eulerian (ALE) framework (discussed later) to accurately track the moving liquid -vapor 

interface during the evaporation process. Within this framework, Eq. (3) is solved only in the 

gaseous domain, whereas Eqs. (4) and (5) are solved in both the liquid and gaseous domain s

and eqn. (6) is solved in the liquid and solid domains, with the convective transport term 

neglected in the solid owing to the absence of bulk molecule motion. Also, it is wort hwhile to 

mention that for the convective transport, we employed the convectio n velocity uc in ALE 

framework defined as the difference between material velocity and mesh velocity, i.e., c fluid mesh u u u= −

. The transient term (( )

# ( )

t

  in eqns. (3), (5), and (6) represents temporal 

change in the mesh coordinate system of ALE framework. The gravitational effects ( ( )

> r

G g

 = +  

) in the Navior -Stokes equation are considered using spatial variation of 

density as a function of temperature for the liquid domain. In case of gaseous domain, the 

density is a function of both temperature and vapor concentration given as: ( )   

> ,wTw r r

T T

    = −

(7),a r aa aa w r wr

p Mp M cM c M RT RT 

   = + − +     

(8)a op p cRT = −

(9)9

Where 

 , βT, M, R represents the density change, volumetric expansion coefficient of water, 

molar mass, and universal gas constant, respectively. The subscripts ‘w’, ‘ a’, and ‘ r’ denotes 

water, air and reference state, respectively. Here, the temperature and vapor concentra tion of 

the far field are considered as the reference conditions for temperature and vapor 

concentration. Also, in present study, we have considered the Boussinesq approximation to 

model the natural convection phenomenon similar to sessile droplet evaporat ion studies [ 35]. 

2.2 Initial and boundary conditions: 

2.2.1 Wetted wall constrains for capillary profile: 

We apply wetted wall constrains i.e., no penetration boundary condition with slip effects at 

the curved solid surfaces to obtain the initial stable capillary profile using level set method. In 

physical sense, the contact line slips over the solid geometry to reach a stable state depending 

upon the specified contact angle at the solid -liquid interface. Mathematically, these boundary 

constrains can be modelled as [36, 37] :0wall LS u n =

(1 0)( )

# ( )( ) 

> int int 0

cos( )wall wall wall nt n n wall wall slip n n n n n t t u

   = −  =  −  −

(1 1)( )    

> slip LS LS wall wall

u u u n n= − 

(1 2)( )

1 0wall n

##       − − =   

(1 3)

Here, nt 

 ,n

##  ,slip u , denotes the tangential stres s, normal component of viscous stress 

tensor , slip velocity and slip length respectively . Also, ,wall int n n represents the unit vector 

normal to wall and interface and wall t is the unit vector tangential to the wall. In present 

study , the slip length is chosen to be equal to the minimum mesh element size. This cond ition 

ensures adequate numerical accuracy while maintaining computational efficiency [38 ]. It is 

worth mentioning that , as the imposed contact angle differs from the angle between the wall 

normal and the interface normal, the contact line slips along the solid wall, causing the 

interface to evolve under the advection field. When the instantaneous contact angle at the 

solid -li quid interface approaches the imposed value, the system reaches an equilibrium state 

and the resulting liquid -vapor interface profile is used as the initial condition for the 

evaporation problem. 10 

2.2.2 Constrain ts for evaporative transport phenomena 

We con sider a local temperature -dependent saturation condition at the liquid -vapor interface 

corresponding to Antoine eqn. [ 39 ] to model the species transport phenomenon. At the far 

field, the vapor concentration (cff ) is maintained at a constant value corresponding to 50% 

relative humidity, while a no -penetration (zero normal flux) condition is imposed on the solid 

boundaries. Ma thematically, these boundary conditions are expressed as: 6

10 ( ) exp ( ) ( )   

> sat sat iii

p Bc r ART T r C RT r 

 = = −  − 

(1 4)0.5 ( )ff sat amb c c T=

(1 5)0

> wall

cn

 =

(1 6)

Here, the coefficients A, B and C are component specific constants and for water the 

corresponding values are given as: A = 9.487, B = 3893K and C = 42.68K [ 40 ]. Also, the 

suffix ‘ i’ represents the interfacial position . This spatial concentration variation results in 

interfacial evaporative flux (J) for which we apply mass conservation at the capillary surface 

given as: ( )

> w

J n D c U c M =  −  + 

(1 7)1 1  

> awwa

U U J

  − = −  

(1 8)

The evaporative mass flux gives rise to evaporative cooling in both the liquid and gaseous 

domains, as the evaporated liquid molecules remove the latent heat of vaporization from the 

interface. The resulting temperature gradients extend into the adjacent solid domain via heat 

conduction, leading to a coupled heat transfer process across all three phases. The 

corresponding thermal boundary condit ions are mathematically described as: 

At liquid -vapor interface: ( ) ( )

# ( )   

> awhaw

n k T k T JL  −  = − (1 9)

At solid -liquid interface: ( ) ( )

# ( )

0s ws w

n k T k T −  = (20 )

At solid -vapor interface: ( ) ( )

# ( )

0s as a

n k T k T −  = (21)

Where, k is thermal conductivity and Lh is the latent heat of vaporization. Also, the subscript 

‘s’ denotes solid domain . The temperature gradients arising from evaporative cooling 11 

generate buoyancy and surface tension -driven flow in the liquid and gaseous domains. The 

two flow fields are coup led at the liquid -vapor interface through the continuity of tangential 

and normal stresses, accounting for Marangoni stresses and capillary pressure. 

Mathematically, the interfacial stress balance is given by: ( )    

> int int int int gl

n S n S n n

  −   = 

(22)( )     

> int int int glTg

n S n S t T

 −   = − 

(23)

Where ( )T 

> g

I n n  = −   ,

, S, t int , n int ,,

T are the surface gradient operator, surface tension, 

stress tensor, unit vector along tangential and normal direction at interface, interfacial 

curvature and temperature derivative of surface tension respectively. In addition, a constant 

temperature condit ion of Tamb = 20°C is imposed at the far -field boundaries and at the end 

faces of the solid cylinder. A no -slip boundary condition is enforced at all solid -liquid and 

solid -gas interfaces. The initial values of velocity, temperature, and relative humidity are 

considered as 0 m/s, 20 oC, and 50% respectively. 

2.3 Computer s imulations 

In the present study, the numerical simulations are carried out in two stages. First, the 

equilibrium capillary profile of the liquid bridge is obtained using the level set method under 

different substrate curvatures and wettability conditions. For this purpose , the level set 

governing equations ( eqns. (1) and (2)) are solved numerically with appropriate boundary 

conditions ( eqns. (10) -(13)). Initially, a liquid column of prescribed volume ( V0 = 2 μL) with 

an arbitrary shape is considered between the solid domain , and the equilibrium contact angle 

is imposed at the solid -liquid interface. The interface thickness is chosen to be equal to the 

maximum mesh size in the subdomains surrounding the liquid -vapor interface [ 41 ], while the 

reinitialization parameter is approximated using the characteristic velocity of the liquid 

bri dge, given by: /char cv h t = where 3

> c

t h

 = . Based on these considerations, the 

capillary profile is iteratively computed until the liquid bridge attains its equilibrium 

configuration. The resulting equilibrium interface pro file obtained from the level set 

simulations is subsequently employed as the initial geometry for the evaporation simulations. 

This two -stage approach ensures that the evaporation process is initiated from a physically 

realistic and mechanically equilibrat ed capillary bridge under the prescribed curvature and 

wettability conditions. 12 

Next, for the evaporation phenomenon, the transient governing equations are solved 

in a fully coupled manner within an arbitrary Lagrangian -Eulerian ( ALE) framework [42, 

43] . In addition to the conventional material and spatial coordinate systems, the ALE 

formulation introduces a moving mesh coordinate system, in which the governing equations 

are formulated. This enables the computational mesh to move independently of both the 

ma terial and spatial coordinates, thereby facilitating accurate tracking of the deforming 

liquid -vapor interface while maintaining high mesh quality throughout the computational 

domain. For the present study, evaporation is simulated under the constant contact radius 

(CCR) mode. Accordingly, the mesh at the solid -liquid interface is fixed, whereas the mesh 

along the liquid -vapor interface is allowed to deform in accordance with the interface motion, 

enabling precise tracking of the moving interf ace. However, th is independent mesh motion 

may lead to mesh distortion, thereby deteriorating numerical accuracy. To mitigate this issue, 

an automatic remeshing strategy is employed, whereby the computational domain is 

regenerated whenever the mesh quality falls below a prescribed threshold of 0. 5.

In present study, b oth stages of the numerical simulations were carried out using the 

transient, fully coupled finite element -based solver provided in COMSOL Multiphysics. The 

computational domain was assumed to be a two -dimensional axisymmetric square with side 

100 R0 as illustrated in Fig. 1(a) . We discretise the entire simulation domain using linear 

Lagrange finite elements for all dependent variables. For meshing, unstructured triangular 

mesh was employed with the most refinement being concentrated local ly near the liquid -

vapor interface and the contact line (approximately 100 times smaller than the liquid bridge 

height ; see f ig. 1( c)). The time stepping for transient study was obtained using a backward 

differentiation formula (BDF) scheme, with the maximum Courant number being limited to 

0. 2. A relative convergence tolerance of 0.005 was prescribed for all dependent variables to 

ensure numerical convergence. Furthermore, streamline diffusion sta bilization was employed 

to suppress numerical oscillations and improve the stability of the finite element solution, 

particularly in convection -dominated regions. For grid independence test , we vary the grid 

points from ~2, 25 ,854 to ~3, 74 ,398 and observed that the change in evaporation rate was 

varued by only 0. 8%. 

For validation of present numerical schemes, we compare the results obtained from 

present simulations with that of previous research works under varied conditions . For 

instance, the numerically obtained stable capillary profile at equilibrium state between solid 

spheres is compared with that of Wang et al. [ 44 ] for varied Bond number conditions. For the 13 

mass loss rate, the transient volume of liquid bridges evaporating between glass spheres is 

compared against the experimental results reported by Bou lodenine et al. [ 31 ]. We also 

compare the transient capillary force due to relative volume loss of evaporating capillary 

bridges with the experimental results of Mielniczuk et al. [ 29 ] for varied heights. It can be 

observed that the results from present nu merical models closely mimic various aspects of 

capillary bridge evaporation phenomenon quite well except for evaporation rate at later stages 

of evaporation. Th is discrepancy can be primarily attributed to contact -line depinning during 

the experiments, wh ich causes the evaporation process to deviate from the assumed constant 

contact radius (CCR) mode adopted in the simulations. Nevertheless, the overall agreement 

between the numerical predictions and experimental observations demonstrates that the 

present modeling framework accurately captures both the stable capillary profile and the 

coupled evaporative transport phenomena under varied conditions .

Fig. 2: Validation of (a) equilibrium capillary profile, (b) transient volume loss, (c) 

capillary force during evaporation of liquid bridges over curved substrates for varied 

test conditions .

# 3. Results and Discussions 

3.1 Stable capillary profiles at the initial equilibrium state 14 

Fig. 3: Stable capillary profile of liquid bridges at initial equilibrium state for (a) 

hydrophilic (  = /4) and (b) SH (  = /4) surfaces under varied curvature of adjacent 

substra te s [The scale bar in red colour represents 0.6 mm length] ; The variation of 

liquid -vapor interfacial temperature under varied curvature of solid substrates for (c) 

hydrophilic and (d) SH surfaces. 

The initial stable capillary profiles of liquid bridges at th e equilibrium state under varied 

wettability and c urvature conditions are shown in fig. 3 (a, b) . The corresponding area of the 

liquid -vapor interface is shown in fig 3 (c) and 3(d) for respectively hydrophilic and SH 

surfaces. We notice that for both hydr ophilic and SH surfaces the initial equilibrium capillary 

profile is strongly dictated by the curvature of the substrates between which the bridge is 

formed. For instance, both in case of hydrophilic and SH surface s, the external radius of 

liquid -vapor int erfacial curvature is increased with the enhanced curvature of solid substrates; 15 

whereas the gorge radius is reduced. Now, although the influence of substrate curvature on 

the equilibrium capillary profile appears qualitatively similar for both wettability conditions, 

its effect on the subsequent transport phenomena may become different. For hydrophilic 

surfaces, increasing substrate curvature shifts the liquid -vapor interface towards the vertical 

plane passing through the upper and lower three -phase contact lines. In contrast, for SH 

surfaces, the effect is quite opposite , with the liquid -vapor interface moving away from the 

same vertical plane. We also notice that for both hydrophilic and SH surfaces, the enhanced 

curvature of solid substrate co nsistently a ug ments the liquid -vapor interfacial area. These 

curvature -induced modifications to the interfacial geometry substantially influence the 

evaporative mass flux, thermofluidic transport, and adhesion characteristics during the 

considered stages o f evaporation as discussed in the sub -sequent subsections. 

3.2 Evaporative mass transfer 16 

Fig. 4: Transient evolution of liquid bridge volume during evaporation under varied 

curvature and thermal conductivity of the solid substrate material s for hydrophilic (a, 

b) and SH surfaces (c, d) [The legends are same for (a), (c) and (b), (d)]. 

The temporal evolution of capillary bridge volume during evaporation under varied curvature 

and thermal conductivity of solid substrate are illustrated in fig 4. We notice that, for both 

hydrophilic and SH cases, the slope of the V* (=V/V 0) with time i.e., the evaporation rate is 

enhanced for curved substrate compared to the flat substrate case and the same is increased in 

a consistent manner with the augmented curvature of the adjacent substrates. These findings 

can be attributed to the modified liquid -vapor interfacial geometry brought about the solid 

substrate curvature. For hydrophilic surfaces, the capillary profile remains concave thereby 

causing the liquid -vapor interface to remain partially confined between the solid substrates .

This condition may result in formation of vapor shroud thereby increasing the local vapour 

concentration surrounding the liquid -vapor interface. As a result, the vapor concentration 

gradient is reduced which leads to low evaporation rate for high concave curvature. Now , in 

case of curved geometry of the solid substrates, the concave nature of th e interfa ce is reduced 

(as seen in fig. 3a) thereby causing a more even spreading of concentration contours around 

the capillary surface. This condition augments the local vapor concentration gradient thereby 

causing higher evaporation rate with enhanced curvature of the solid substrates. For SH 

surface, the interfacial curvature remains convex for the considered cases. In such cases, the 

induction of solid substrate curvature causes the liquid bridge to protrude further thereby 

causing a shorter average d iffusion length scale. This condition favours the evaporated 

molecules to diffuse to far field at a faster rate thereby amplifying the mass loss rate with 

enhanced curvature. In addition, for both hydrophilic and superhydrophobic (SH) surfaces, 

the introdu ction of substrate curvature increases the exposed liquid -vapor interfacial area 

available for mass transfer to the surrounding ambient for same liquid bridge volume. This 

enlarged evaporative interface further enhances the overall mass loss rate for curve d substrate 

configurations compared to the flat one .

We also observe that, for a specific geometry (i.e., same solid substrate curvature c2 =

0.3 mm -1), the evaporation rate consistently decreases with the reduc tion in thermal 

conductivity of the solid substrate material for both hydrophilic and SH surfaces . These 

findings can be attributed to the strong dependency of the saturation concentration on the 

evaporative cooling induced temperature drop along the liquid -vapor interface . During 

evaporation, the liquid domain cools down due to the extraction of latent heat by the 17 

evaporated liquid molecules. Now, in case of higher thermal conductivity of the adj acent 

solid substrates, this evaporation induced cooling is partially compensated by the higher 

incoming heat flux from the solid substrates. In contrast , for lower thermal conductivity 

cases, the evaporative cooing effects spread across both liquid and solid domain s owing to 

limited heat conduction in solid . Th is condition results in higher temperature drop i.e., 

effectively lower temperature along the liquid -vapor interface resulting in a lower interfacial 

saturation vapor concentration. As a result , the interfacial vapor concentration gradient is 

reduced, ther eby decreasing the evaporation rate compared to substrates with higher thermal 

conductivity. 

Next, we look into the variation of evaporative mass flux along the liquid -vapor 

interface of capillary bridges under varied conditions considered in present study . Fig. 5 

illustrates this mass flux distribution for varied curvature and thermal conductivity of the 

solid substrate. Here, the evaporative flux is non -dimensionalized as: ( )

> 0

* ( )sat s

JJ D c T cR

> 

= − 

> ;

where R0 is the overall radius of interfacial curvature for 

corresponding cases. We notice that, for all considered cases, the evaporative flux tends to 

diverge near both the contact lines. This finding may be attributed to the reduced probability 

of vapor re -adso rption due to the presence of the solid boundary. In general, for equilibrium 

phase transfer phenomenon (such as evaporation), both the phases co -exist at the interface 

with spontaneous conversion from one to another phase. In other words, during evaporati on, 

the liquid molecules are evaporated and again re -adsorbed at the liquid -vapor interface. Now, 

near the edge of liquid domain, the probability of re -adsorption is reduced due to the presence 

of solid boundary. Also, the large diffusion angle between the liquid vapor interface and solid 

domain provide more scope for the evaporated molecules to diffuse to far field. As a result, 

the overall diffusion length becomes significantly smaller thereby furnish es steep vapor 

concentration gradient similar to sessile droplets [ 45 ]. This sharp concentration gradient 

justifies the diverging nature of the evaporative flux near three -phase contact point of the 

capillary bridges especially for hydrophilic surfaces . In c ase of SH cases , the interfacial mass 

flux distribution is relatively more uniform i.e., the diverging nature is partially mitigated due 

to reduced wedge angle (i.e., shrunk diffusion domain) between the liquid -vapor interface 

and the solid surface. 18 

Fig. 5: Distribution of interfacial mass flux along the capillary surface of liquid bridges 

under varied curvature and thermal conductivity cases for hydrophilic (a, b) and SH 

surfaces (c, d) [The legends are same for (a), (c) and (b), (d)]. 

In case of cur ved substrates, we notice that the evaporative mass flux consistently 

increase s with the enhanced convex curvature for both hydrophilic and SH surfaces. 

Furthermore, for a given solid -liquid geometry, the mass flux is reduced with the decreased 

thermal conductivity of the solid substrate material. These trends in the evaporative mass flux 

are consistent with the corresponding evaporation rates and are prim arily attributed to the 

curvature -induced modification of the capillary surface geometry, as discussed earlier. We 

also notice that, there is a local decrease in evaporative flux around * 0.5 z  for all the cases 

considered in present stud y. This behaviour can be ascribed to the local reduction in 

interfacial temperature due to evaporative cooling effects thereby reducing saturation vapor 

concentration at liquid -vapor interface and consequently weakens the vapor concentration 

gradient in th e surrounding gaseous domain . These effects are more pronounced for SH 19 

surfaces with high thermal ly conductive materials . As a result, the local dip in evaporative 

flux around * 0.5 z  is more prominent for SH surfaces compared to hydrophilic cases .

3.3 Thermo -fluidic transport behaviour 

Fig. 6: (a) Distribution of temperature and velocity field in the liquid and gaseous 

domain during evaporation of capillary bridges formed between hyd rophilic curved 

substrates; Variation of temperature and velocity scale for different (b) curvature and 

(c) thermal conductivity of solid substrates. 

The non -uniform evaporative flux results in uneven evaporative cooling effects along 

capillary surface the reby cause bulk fluid motion in both liquid and gaseous domain due to 

thermal Marangoni effects or buoyancy driven advection. Fig. 6 (a) illustrates these 

temperature and velocity field during evaporation for liquid bridge formed between curved 

hydrophilic surfaces. The subscripts init , dev, stbl represent conditions corresponding to 

initial, developing and stable stages of flow field during evaporation. The corresponding 20 

velocity and temperature scales representing peak velocity (Up) and highest temperature drop 

(p amb lowest T T T = − ) for different curvature and thermal conductivity of solid substrates are 

shown in fig. 6(b) and 6(c) respectively . These results for SH surfaces are illustrated in fig. 7. 

In both these plots , the velocity and temperature scales are non -dimensionalized as: ( )

> 0

* / /p wU U R

=

and ( )  

> *0
> pwwT

TT R

   = ; where 

w,

w,

w,

T and R0 represent 

kinematic and dynamic viscosit ies , thermal diffusivity of water, temperature derivative of 

surface tension for air -water interface, and , overall radius of interfacial curvature 

respectively . Now, before analyzing the thermo -hydrodynamic characteristics, we first 

examine the underlying physical mechanisms governing the generation of the flow field. In 

case of thermal imbalance, bulk fluid motion may be genera ted due to Marangoni or 

buoyancy effects. To weigh the relative importance of these flow triggering mechanisms, we 

obtain the Marangoni number and Grashoff number as: 0T p w wMa T R 

  =  and 230p wGr g T R 

= 

. These non -dimensional numbers under varied considered cases are 

summarized in table 2. Physically, these numbers represent the relative strength of Marangoni 

effects or buoyance force over viscus effects in generating molecule mobility disturbances .

For all cons idered conditions, we notice that the Marangoni number is significantly higher or 

in same magnitude order of the critical conditions ( Ma CR =83 [ 46 ]) for realizing the 

Marangoni effects. However, the obtained Grashoff number s are /// order of magnitude 

smaller than critical state (Gr CR =2400 [47, 48 ]) to trigger buoyance driven motion. Hence, we 

infer the dominance of Marangoni advection over buoyance effects in setting off bulk fluid 

motion during evaporation. We also obtain the h eat Peclet number ( ) 

> 0hw

Pe VR 

= to probe 

internal heat transport mechanism as shown in table 2. As observed, the high Peclet numbers 

for most considered cases represent the strong influence of heat advection over conductive 

effects in the overall internal heat transfer phenomenon. 

Table 2: Non -dimensional numbers to characterize internal thermo -fluidic s

Wetting effects 

 =

/4 

 = 5 

/6 

Non -dimensional numbers Ma Gr Pe h Ma Gr Pe h

Effect of C0 93.98 0.06 20.38 112.78 0.01 25.44 21 

curvature for 

constant 

thermal 

conductivity 

C1 241.67 0.61 55.56 124.86 0.02 28.02 

C2 429.65 1.99 78.13 169.17 0.04 36.88 

C3 584.05 3.43 95.79 194.57 0.05 40.54 

Effect of 

thermal 

conductivity 

for constant 

curvature 

Aluminum 429.65 1.99 78.13 169.17 0.04 36.88 

Alumina 340.13 1.58 71.01 140.97 0.03 34.54 

Glass 196.92 0.915 61.58 68.47 0.016 22.78 

Acrylic 89.51 0.415 43.83 64.44 0.014 18.19 

Fig. 7: (a) Distribution of temperature and velocity field in the liquid and gaseous 

domain during evaporation of capillary bridges formed between SH curved substrates; 22 

Variation of temperature and velocity scale for different (b) curvature and (c) thermal 

conductivity of solid substrates. 

Next, we look into the transient development pattern of the eva poration induced 

thermo -flow -field under varied conditions considered in present study . For hydrophilic 

surfaces , the peak evaporativ e flux at initial condition locally cools down the fluid edge s near 

three phase contact lines. This condition set off two co -vortices sweeping liquid along liquid -

vapor interface from neck region (z*  0.5) towards the contact points as seen in fig. 6(a) at 

the initial stage . With progressing time, this fluid motion result in internal heat advection 

thereby resulting in generation of multiple local thermal extrema at the interface. This 

condition results in formation of multiple local vortices temporarily adjacent the interface 

during the flow developing stages. Finally, at stable state, the primary cooling spot shifts 

towards the neck region, resulting in a monotonic temperature variation from the highest 

value at the three -phase contact line to the lowest value at the neck region. As a result, the 

stable flow field consist of two counteracting vortices transferring fluid from the contact line 

towards neck region along interface. In case of SH surfaces (see fig 7(a)) , a more uniform 

mass flux cools the ent ire interface in a more even manner thereby lowering the liquid 

domain temperature than the solid. As a result, the counter -rotating vortices become clearly 

discernible from the onset of evaporation and become increasingly pronounced upon reaching 

the stable state. 

Now, although this evaporation induced thermo -flow -field remain qualitatively 

similar for altered curvature and thermal conductivit y of the solid substrates , the 

corresponding velocity and temperature scale exhibit significant variations as s hown in fig. 

6(b, c) and 7(b, c) . For instance, we observe that, the velocity scale is consistently increased 

with enhanced curvature and thermal conductivity of solid substrates. The corresponding 

temperature drops in both liquid and gaseous domain is int ensified consistently with 

enhanced curvature of solid substrates. However, the overall temperature drop increases in a 

more rapid manner than that of liquid domain. In other words, a significant fraction of 

evaporative cooling induced temperature drop rem ains concentrated in the solid domain for 

high curvature cases. Th e trend in the se variatio ns of temperature and velocity scales for 

different curvature s remain qualitatively similar for both hydrophilic and SH surfaces. These 

findings can be ascribed to the enhanced evaporation rate with curtailed solid -liquid 

interfacial area for curved geometries. It is can be noticed that (see fig. 3) the solid -liquid 

interfacial area is shrunk for curved substrates than the flat one thereby limits the heat 23 

transfer rate from solid to fluid domain . Whereas, the evaporation rate is increased due to 

altered liquid -vapor interfac ial geometry. Both these factors favor steep thermal gradient in 

solid domain to compensate for enhanced evaporative cooling e ffects. As a result, the 

temperature drop in solid domain is steeply increased than the liquid one for curved 

geometries of solid substrate . Th e slower increase in the temperature drop within the liquid 

domain also explains the corresponding reduction in t he rate of increase of the velocity scale 

as shown in Fig. 6 (b) and 7 (b). 

For substrates with altered thermal conductivities, the variation in temperature drops 

across the solid and liquid domains differs significantly, as shown in Figs. 6(c) and 7(c). 

Specifically, the overall temperature drop increases sharply with decreasing thermal 

conductivity of the solid substrate, whereas the temperature drop within the liquid domain 

decreases slightly. Consequently, although the overall evaporative cooling becomes 

substantially stronger for substrates with lower thermal conductivity, the corresponding 

velocity sca le is reduced. Apparently , this trend appears counterintuitive, since stronger 

evaporative cooling is generally expected to enhance the Marangoni effects and thereby 

upscaling the flow velocity . This seemingly contradictory behavior is primarily attributed to 

the limited heat conduction capability of thermally insulating substrates. Due to their poor 

thermal conductivity, a major portion of the evaporative cooling remains confined within the 

solid domain rather than being transmitted to the liquid. For exam ple, for substrates with very 

low thermal conductivity (e.g., acrylic plastic, whose thermal conductivity is even lower than 

that of water), nearly 98% of the overall temperature drop remains concentrated within the 

solid domain. As a result, despite the s ubstantial increase in the overall evaporative cooling, 

the temperature drop across the liquid domain is slightly reduced. This condition ultimately 

weakens the thermal gradient within the liquid thereby suppress ing the Marangoni stresses, 

leading to a red uction in the characteristic flow velocity as seen in fig 6(b) and 7(b) .

3.4 Adhesion Dynamics: 

The evolving liquid -vapor interface of liquid bridges during evaporation can significantly 

influence the capillary force interaction between the two solid cylinders. Physically, the 

capillary force comprises two components: the pressure force (PF ) arising from the pressure 

difference across the liquid -vapor interface and the surface tension force (ST F ) acting al ong 

the contact line (or gorge perimeter) of the liquid bridge. Mathematically, the total capillary 

force can be expressed as [49 ]:24 cap P ST F F F= +

(24 )2 

> Pg

F r p

 

> 

= − 

(25 )2ST gF r

 =

(26 )

Here, rg is the gorge radius and p is the pressure difference across the liquid -vapor interface. 

These c lassical expressions for pressure and surface tension component of capillary force are 

derived under the fundamental assumption that the liquid -vapor interface remains in 

mechanical equilibrium . Since the interface continuously evolves during evaporation in the 

present study, it is worthwhile to first examine the validity of these expressions under 

dynamic conditions. In present study, the evaporation induced flow velocity for all cases 

remain below the order O (1 0) mm/s. The corresponding dyna mic pressure component 

becomes p d 2

0.5 U

##   O (1 0-2) Pa which is much smaller than the capillary pressure 

component ( pc  O (1 02)) of meso -scale capillary bridge [ 28, 29 ]. In addition, to assess the 

influence of viscous effects relative to surface tension in modifying the liquid -vapor interface 

through the interfacial stress balance, we evaluate the capillary number as /w pCa U

 = . In 

present study, we observed that the capillary number for all test cases remain in the order Ca 

 O (10 -4). Thus, we note that surface tension strongly dominates over viscous effects at 

liquid -vapor interface. Also, in case of water droplet evaporation the process follows 

quasistatic equilibrium behaviour [ 50 ]. Therefore, we infer that interface evolves in a quasi -

static manner and remains close to mechanical equilibrium throughout the evaporation 

process. Consequently, the classical expressions for the capillary force calculation remain 

valid throughout the considered stages of evaporation . In present study, we directly employ 

the numerically obtained average pressure with in liquid domain and surface tension at gorge 

perimeter in eqn. (25) and (26) to obtain the capillary force components at different stages of 

evaporation. 25 

Fig. 8: Dynamic evolution of pressure and surface tension component of capil lary forces 

due to relative volume loss of evaporating capillary bridges for hydrophilic (a, b) and 

SH surfaces ( c, d) [The legends are same for all sub -figures] .

The dynamic evolution of pressure ( PF ) and surface tension ( ST F ) component of 

capillary forces due to relative volume loss of capillary bridges during evaporation are 

illustrated in fig. 8. The corresponding total capillary force for varied curvature and thermal 

conductivity of solid substrate s are shown in fig. 9. Here, the force components are non -

dimensionalized as: FST * = FST /

R0, and F

> P

* = F

> P

/

R0. In these plots a n attraction force is 

considered as positive while the repulsive one is assumed as negative. We notic e that for 

hydrophilic surface the capillary pressure increases to a maximum value and then decreases 

with progression the progressing volume loss under varied substrate curvature during 

evaporation. Also, the overall magnitude of capillary pressure is co nsistently reduced for 

curved geometry cases than the flat substrate. These trends can be attributed to the transient 

evolution of the liquid -vapor interfacial geometry during evaporation. At the initial stages, 

the external radius of curvature decreases m ore rapidly than the gorge radius. Consequently, 26 

the capillary suction pressure increases, although its rate of increase gradually diminishes 

[29] . As evaporation proceeds, the rates of change of the external and gorge radii become 

nearly identical, result ing in a n instability point :( ) 0d p dV  = i.e., the suction pressure 

remains nearly constant although the volume changes . Beyond this stage, the gorge radius 

decreases at a higher rate than the external radius of curvature, leading to a progr essive 

reduction in the capillary suction pressure with continued liquid volume loss [29] . Also, the 

overall reduction in capillary curvature justifies the smaller magnitude of internal capillary 

pressure for curved substrates as compared to the flat one. 

In case of SH surfaces, the large contact angle at solid -liquid interface results in 

internal gauge pressure thereby resulting in repulsive capillary pressure force between the 

solid substrates for all cases as shown in fig. 8(c) . This initial repulsive fo rce is significantly 

higher for flat substrates and the pressure intensity is reduced in a prominent manner with 

enhanced solid substrate curvature due to reduced liquid -vapor interfacial curvature similar to 

hydrophilic cases. However, with progress ive vo lume loss the internal capillary gauge 

pressure mitigates at a faster rate for low curvature cases and the rate is diminished with 

enhanced curvature of the solid substrates . This behavior can be attributed to the curvature -

induced modification of the capi llary bridge geometry for SH surfaces . With increasing 

substrate curvature, a larger fraction of the liquid bridge protrudes into the gap between the 

solid cylinders, causing the liquid -vapor interface to shift farther away from the vertical plane 

passing through the three -phase contact line ( see fig . 3). Consequently, a greater amount of 

liquid must evaporate to produce an equivalent change in internal capillary pressure. This 

delays the reduction in the capillary gauge pressure, resulting in a slower rate of pressure 

decay during evaporation over curved substrates .

We further observe that the surface tension component of the capillary force remains 

positive and decreases monotonically throughout the evaporation process for both hydrophilic 

and SH surfaces. This monotonic decrease is primarily attributed to the progre ssive reduction 

in the gorge radius during evaporation. The surface tension force remains positive because 

the liquid -vapor interface continuously exerts a tensile force along the contact line, thereby 

attracting the two solid substrates toward each other. However, the total capillary force is 

determined by the combined contributions of the pressure and surface tension components, as 

shown in Fig. 9. For hydrophilic surfaces, the pressure component is also attractive (suction), 

and therefore both components act synergistically, resulting in an overall attractive capillary 

force. In contrast, for SH surfaces, the positive internal gauge pressure generates a repulsive 27 

pressure force that exceeds the attractive surface tension component. Consequently, the 

resul tant capillary force becomes repulsive. For substrates with lower thermal conductivity, 

the overall capillary force magnitude is marginally enhanced for both hydrophilic and SH 

surfaces, as shown in Fig. 9 (c, d). This behavior is primarily attributed to t he increase in 

surface tension resulting from the lower interfacial temperature caused by the enhanced 

evaporative cooling. As the thermal conductivity of the substrate decreases, the intensified 

evaporative cooling reduces the liquid -vapor interfacial tem perature, thereby increasing the 

surface tension. Consequently, the both the surface tension and pressure component of the 

capillary force is consistently enhanced, leading to a slight increase in the overall capillary 

force magnitude with decreasing subst rate thermal conductivity. 

Fig. 9: Dynamic evolution of total capillary force due to relative volume loss of 

evaporating capillary bridges for varied curvature and thermal conductivity of solid 

substrates [The legends are same for (a, c) and (b, d) ].28 

# 4. Conclusions 

To conclude , we probe the thermo -hydrodynamics, species transport, and adhesion dynamics 

of evaporating capillary bridges under the combined effects of substrate curvature, 

wettability, and thermal conductivity. Equilibrium capillary bridge profiles are first obtained 

using the level -set method and subsequently employed as the initial configuration for 

evaporation simulations based on a transient, fully coupled Arbitrary Lagrangian -Eulerian 

(ALE) framework. The numerical predictions show good agreement with available 

experimental and theoretical studies, demonstrating the accuracy of the proposed model. The 

key findings of the present investigation are summarized as: 

• For both hydrophilic and superhydrophobic (SH) surfaces, increasing the convex ity of 

adjacent substrates significantly enlarges the liquid -vapor interfacial area and its radius of 

curvature , thereby enhancing the evaporative mass loss owing to the increased mass 

transfer area and steeper vapor concentration gradient at the int erface. In contrast, 

substrates with lower thermal conductivity suppress the evaporation rate by limiting heat 

conduction to the liquid bridge, resulting in lower interfacial temperatures and a

consequent reduction in the local saturation vapor concentrati on at the interface. 

• The presence of solid boundary dictates diverging evaporative flux near the three -phase 

contact line. This non -uniformity in mass flux results in uneven evaporative cooling 

effects thereby set off bulk internal motion. The non -dimensio nal scaling analysis showed 

that the Marangoni effects strongly dominate over buoyancy effects in the overall flow 

features. This Marangoni -induced interfacial flow sweeps liquids from the contact line 

towards the gorge region thereby resulting in formation of two counter -acting vortices at 

the stable state. Moreover, t his bulk internal flow causes heat advection thereby affecting 

the overall thermo -fluid -species transport phenomena during the evaporation process. 

• The evaporation induced velocity sc ales are significantly higher for curved substrates due 

to enhanced evaporative cooling caused by higher evaporation rate. However, the velocity 

scales are diminished for liquid bridges formed between low thermally conductive 

surfaces despite substantially higher evaporative cooling effects. This behavior is 

attributed to the low thermal conductance of the solid substrate, which confines nearly 

98% of the total evaporation -induced temperature drop within the substrate. 

Consequently, the thermal gradient wit hin the liquid domain is substantially weakened, 

thereby suppressing the Marangoni stresses and the associated flow velocities. 29 

• The net capillary force is predominantly positive (suction) for hydrophilic surfaces, 

whereas it remains predominantly negative (repulsion) for superhydrophobic (SH) 

surfaces during most stages of evaporation owing to the altered wetting characteristics. 

Induction of substrate convexity, reduces the overall magnitude of capillary force due to 

dimi ni shed capillary curvature. Also, a reduction in the thermal conductivity of the solid 

substrate slightly enhances the capillary force due to the marginal increase in surface 

tension resulting from the lower interfacial temperature. 

Data availability : All data pertaining to the research are in the article. 

Conflicts of interest : The authors declare having no conflicts of interests. 

Acknowledgements : AP and PD thank MNNIT Allahabad and IIT Kharagpur for partially 

funding the research via internal grants. 

# Refference s:

1. El Youssoufi, M. S., Delenne, J. Y., & Radjai, F. (2005). Self -stresses and crack formation by 

particle swelling in cohesive granular media. Physical Review E , 71 (5), 051307. 

2. Richefeu, V., El Youssoufi, M. S., & Radjai, F. (2006). Shear strength properties of wet granular 

materials. Physical Review E , 73 (5), 051304. 

3. Péron, H., Delenne, J. Y., Laloui, L., & El Youssoufi, M. S. (2009). Discrete element modelling of 

drying shrinkage and cracking of soils. Computers and Geotechnics , 36 (1 -2), 61 -69. 

4. Or, D., & Gh ezzehei, T. A. (2007). Traveling liquid bridges in unsaturated fractured porous 

media. Transport in porous media , 68 (1), 129 -151. 

5. Kumar, S. (2015). Liquid transfer in printing processes: liquid bridges with moving contact 

lines. Annual Review of Fluid Mech anics , 47 , 67 -94. 

6. Lappalainen, K., Manninen, M., Alopaeus, V., Aittamaa, J., & Dodds, J. (2009). An analytical 

model for capillary pressure –saturation relation for gas –liquid system in a packed -bed of spherical 

particles. Transport in Porous Media , 77 (1), 17 -40. 

7. Wei, Z., & Zhao, Y. P. (2007). Growth of liquid bridge in AFM. Journal of Physics D: Applied 

Physics , 40 (14), 4368. 

8. Kawamura, H., Nishino, K., Matsumoto, S., & Ueno, I. (2012). Report on microgravity 

experiments of Marangoni convection aboard i nternational space station. 

9. Qian, B., & Breuer, K. S. (2011). The motion, stability and breakup of a stretching liquid bridge 

with a receding contact line. Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 666 , 554 -572. 30 

10. Jeong, S. H., Nakayama, W., Nam, S. K., & Lee, S. K. (2012 , May). Design of a liquid bridge 

heat switch system based on the liquid bridge control for electronics cooling. In 2012 IEEE 62nd 

Electronic Components and Technology Conference (pp. 1951 -1954). Ieee. 

11. Hunyh, T., Muradoglu, M., Liew, O. W., & Ng, T. W. (20 13). Contact angle and volume retention 

effects from capillary bridge evaporation in biochemical microplating. Colloids and Surfaces A: 

Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects , 436 , 647 -655. 

12. Velev, O. D., & Kaler, E. W. (1999). In situ assembly of colloida l particles into miniaturized 

biosensors. Langmuir , 15 (11), 3693 -3698. 

13. Van Honschoten, J. W., Tas, N. R., & Elwenspoek, M. (2010). The profile of a capillary liquid 

bridge between solid surfaces. American Journal of Physics , 78 (3), 277 -286. 

14. Gagneux, G., & Millet, O. (2014). Analytic calculation of capillary bridge properties deduced as 

an inverse problem from experimental data. Transport in porous media , 105 (1), 117 -139. 

15. Mielniczuk, B., Millet, O., Gagneux, G., & El Youssoufi, M. S. (2018). C haracterisation of 

pendular capillary bridges derived from experimental data using inverse problem 

method. Granular Matter , 20 (1), 1 -11. 

16. Soori, T., & Ward, T. (2019). Evaporation and instability of an unbounded -axisymmetric liquid 

bridge between chemically similar and different substrates. Journal of colloid and interface 

science , 539 , 45 -53. 

17. Paul, A., Samanta, D., & Dhar, P. (2023). Evaporation kinetics of wettability -moderated capillary 

bridges and squeezed droplets. Chemical Engineering Science, 265, 118 267. 

18. Portuguez, E., Alzina, A., Michaud, P., & Smith, A. (2016). Evaporation kinetics and breaking of 

a thin water liquid bridge between two plates of silicon wafer. Advances in Materials Physics and 

Chemistry , 6(7), 157 -166. 

19. Jaiswal, A. K., Benard, B., Garg, V., & Khandekar, S. (2022). Evaporation Dynamics of Liquid 

Bridge Formed Between Two Heated Hydrophilic and Hydrophobic Flat Surfaces. Interfacial 

Phenomena and Heat Transfer , 10 (1). 

20. He, X., Cheng, J., Collier, C. P., Srijanto, B. R., & Briggs, D. P. (2020). Evaporation of squeezed 

water droplets between two parallel hydrophobic/superhydrophobic surfaces. Journal of colloid 

and interface science , 576 , 127 -138. 

21. Soori, T., & Ward, T. (2019). Evaporation and instability of an unbounded -axisymmetric liqui d

bridge between chemically similar and different substrates. Journal of colloid and interface 

science , 539 , 45 -53. 

22. Paul, A., Roy, A., & Dhar, P. (2024). External stefan and internal marangoni thermo -fluid 

dynamics for evaporating capillary bridges. Langmu ir , 40 (10), 5255 -5269. 

23. Simic -Stefani, S., Kawaji, M., & Yoda, S. (2006). Onset of oscillatory thermocapillary convection 

in acetone liquid bridges: the effect of evaporation. International journal of heat and mass 

transfer , 49 (17 -18), 3167 -3179. 31 

24. Paul, A., Mondal, S., & Dhar, P. (2024). Droplet evaporation on curved surfaces: transients of 

internal and external transport phenomena. Proceedings of the Royal Society A , 480 (2287), 

20230613. 

25. Basu, S., Rao, D. C. K., Chattopadhyay, A., & Chakraborty, J. (2021). D issolution dynamics of a 

vertically confined sessile droplet. Physical Review E, 103(1), 013101. 

26. Haines, W. B. (1925). Studies in the physical properties of soils: II. A note on the cohesion 

developed by capillary forces in an ideal soil1. The Journal of A gricultural Science , 15 (4), 529 -

535. 

27. Fisher, R. A. (1926). On the capillary forces in an ideal soil; correction of formulae given by WB 

Haines. The Journal of Agricultural Science , 16 (3), 492 -505. 

28. Mielniczuk, B., Hueckel, T., & Youssoufi, M. S. E. (2014). Evaporation -induced evolution of the 

capillary force between two grains. Granular Matter , 16 (5), 815 -828. 

29. Mielniczuk, B., Hueckel, T., & El Youssoufi, M. S. (2015). Laplace pressure evolution and four 

instabilities in evaporating two -grain liquid b ridges. Powder Technology , 283 , 137 -151. 

30. Paul, A., Dash, R. K., & Dhar, P. (2023). Phenomenology and kinetics of sessile droplet 

evaporation on convex contours. International Journal of Thermal Sciences , 187 , 108194. 

31. Bouloudenine, A., Li, L., Chikh, S., Wa ng, K., & Bibi, F. (2026). Experimental investigation on 

capillary bridge dynamics and adhesive forces in porous structures. Physics of Fluids , 38 (1). 

32. Lai, T., & Meng, Y. (2018). Time -dependent dynamic behaviors of a confined liquid to achieve 

tailored adh esion force with repeated contacts revealed by atomic force 

microscopy. Langmuir , 34 (50), 15211 -15227. 

33. Liu, G., Zhang, C., Zhao, J., & Zhu, Y. (2008). Study of the morphology of the three -phase 

contact line and its evolution by morphological examination af ter droplet evaporation of aqueous 

polymer solutions. Langmuir , 24 (15), 7923 -7930. 

34. Olsson, E., Kreiss, G., & Zahedi, S. (2007). A conservative level set method for two phase flow 

II. Journal of Computational Physics , 225 (1), 785 -807 .

35. Sobac, B., & Brutin, D. (2012). Thermal effects of the substrate on water droplet 

evaporation. Physical Review E —Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics , 86 (2), 021602. 

36. Shikhmurzaev, Y. D. (1993). The moving contact line on a smooth solid surface. International 

Journal of Multiphase Flow , 19 (4), 589 -610. 

37. Gerbeau, J. F., & Lelievre, T. (2009). Generalized Navier boundary condition and geometric 

conservation law for surface tension. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and 

Engineering , 198 (5 -8), 644 -656. 

38. Zhang, J., & Yue, P. (2020). A level -set method for moving contact lines with contact angle 

hysteresis. Journal of Computational Physics, 418, 109636. 

39. Antoine, C. (1888). Vapor Pressure: a new relationship between pressure and temperature. CR 

Acad. Sci , 107 , 681 -685. 

40. Thomas Jr, F. (2012). Steam and gas tables with computer equations. Elsevier. 32 

41. Wong, V. L., Loizou, K., Lau, P. L., Graham, R. S., & Hewakandamby, B. N. (2017). Numerical 

studies of shear -thinning droplet formation in a microflui dic T -junction using two -phase level -

SET method. Chemical Engineering Science , 174 , 157 -173. 

42. Donea, J., Huerta, A., Ponthot, J. P., & Rodríguez‐Ferran, A. (2004). Arbitrary Lagrangian –

Eulerian Methods. Encyclopedia of computational mechanics .

43. Souli, M., & Zolesio, J. P. (2001). Arbitrary Lagrangian –Eulerian and free surface methods in 

fluid mechanics. Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 191 (3 -5), 451 -466. 

44. Wang, S., Liu, F., Pu, C., Cui, J., & Zeng, Z. (2022). Mathematical study on gravity effect of the 

liquid bridge between two rigid spheres. Powder Technology , 407 , 117662. 

45. Deegan, R. D., Bakajin, O., Dupont, T. F., Huber, G., Nagel, S. R., & Witten, T. A. (1997). 

Capillary flow as the cause of ring stains from dried liquid drops. Nature , 389 (6653), 827 -829. 

46. Pearson, J. R. A. (1958). On convection cells induced by surface tension. Journal of fluid 

mechanics , 4(5), 489 -500. 

47. Al -Sharafi, A., Yilbas, B. S., Sahin, A. Z., Ali, H., & Al -Qahtani, H. (2016). Heat transfer 

characteristics an d internal fluidity of a sessile droplet on hydrophilic and hydrophobic 

surfaces. Applied Thermal Engineering , 108 , 628 -640. 

48. Lu, G., Duan, Y. Y., Wang, X. D., & Lee, D. J. (2011). Internal flow in evaporating droplet on 

heated solid surface. International journal of heat and mass transfer , 54 (19 -20), 4437 -4447. 

49. Gong, X., Yang, L., Liao, X., Cheng, J., & Yang, C. (2025). Liquid bridge morphology and 

capillary bridge force between particles: Insights from experiment and numerical 

simulation. Chemical Engineering Science , 313 , 121743. 

50. Paul, A., & Dhar, P. (2021). Evaporation kinetics of sessile droplets morphed by substrate 

curvature. Physics of Fluids , 33 (12).