Title: Simulations of Particle-Laden Flows with Large Dispersed-Phase Size Disparities Using Highly Scalable Parallel Adaptive Methods

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.20565v1

Published Time: Thu, 21 May 2026 00:23:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Simulations of Particle-Laden Flows with Large Dispersed-Phase Size Disparities Using Highly Scalable Parallel Adaptive Methods 

Linfeng Jiang a, Enrico Calzavarini b, Dominik Krug a,c, ∗

> aInstitute of Aerodynamics, RWTH Aachen University, Wüllnerstraße 5a, 52062 Aachen, Germany,
> bUniversité de Lille, Unite de Mécanique de Lille - J. Boussinesq, UML ULR 7512, F59000 Lille, France,
> cPhysics of Fluids Group, Max Planck Center for Complex Fluid Dynamics, and J. M. Burgers Centre for Fluid Mechanics, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands,

Abstract 

The numerical simulation of multiphase flows involving dispersed components with large scale disparities, such as the collisions between millimeter-sized bubbles and micron-sized mineral particles in flotation, poses a significant computational challenge. Accurately resolving the thin boundary layers of finite-size objects while tracking massive numbers of small particles within a large turbulent domain is often prohibitively expensive on uniform grids. To address this, we present a parallel scalable computational framework that couples the lattice Boltzmann method with the immersed boundary method on a dynamically adaptive octree grid. A key algorithm is developed for the efficient parallel host-cell searching, which significantly accelerates the tracking of Lagrangian points on distributed unstructured grids. The accuracy and robustness of the code are rigorously validated against canonical benchmarks, including the flow induced by an oscillating cylinder and the sedimentation of a sphere. The framework is applied to the multiscale problem of bubble-particle collisions. In quiescent flow, the simulations accurately capture the hydrodynamic interception mechanism, reproducing the theoretical collision efficiency scaling law proportional to the square of the particle-to-bubble size ratio. Furthermore, the framework is applied to the simulation of fully resolved bubbles interacting with inertial point particles in homogeneous isotropic turbulence. 

Keywords: 

Lattice Boltzmann method, Immersed boundary method, Adaptive mesh refinement, Collision dynamics 

1. Introduction 

Fluids in nature and industry often contain suspensions of particles, bubbles, or droplets of various sizes. Collisions among these dispersed entities play a crucial role in many physical and environmental processes, i.e., the formation of raindrops through the coalescence of microscopic water droplets [1], sedimentation in rivers [2], fractional solidification of magmas [3]. Similar mechanisms are also essential in numerous industrial applications, including water treatment [4], mineral recovery through flotation [5], and the separation of plastics for recycling [6]. Numerical simulation provides a powerful tool to study such complex multiphase flow systems and to explore the dynamics of particle collisions under controlled conditions. A central challenge in modeling such particle-laden flows is the accurate and efficient resolution of collisions between entities with large separations in scale, particularly within a turbulent background. For instance, in flotation, millimeter-sized bubbles interact with micron-sized mineral particles. These interactions involve high particle Reynolds numbers ( Re p) and thin boundary layers around the dispersed phase. Accurately capturing the two-way coupling between the particles and the surrounding fluid therefore necessitates interface-resolved simulation methods. The immersed boundary method (IBM) has emerged as a leading approach for simulating flows with finite-size parti-cles [7, 8]. In the IBM framework, an interface is discretized by Lagrangian markers, and boundary conditions are enforced on the underlying Eulerian grid. This avoids the complexities of body-fitted meshing. However, this advantage comes at a steep price. To resolve the thin boundary layer around each particle, a fine grid resolution must be applied globally when using a uniform grid, causing the total number of grid points to scale severely with the Reynolds number [8]. The challenge is amplified in turbulent flows, where the grid must resolve both the particle boundary layers and the smallest dissipative eddies of the background flow. For a particle with a large Re p, the required grid spacing scales as O(Re −0.5 

> p

) [9]. If the particle diameter is merely ten times the Kolmogorov scale ( dp/η ∼ O(10) ), the background flow is massively over-resolved, leading to prohibitive computational costs on uniform grids. Adaptive, tree-based grid structures present a potent solution to this computational bottleneck. By refining the mesh locally, fine grids can be concentrated around particle interfaces to resolve boundary layers, while coarser grids can efficiently represent the larger scales of the background flow. This   

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email address: d.krug@aia.rwth-aachen.de (Dominik Krug)
> arXiv:2605.20565v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 19 May 2026

approach not only dramatically reduces the total number of grid points but also maintains locally uniform grid patches, which is ideal for preserving the accuracy of the IBM interpolation schemes. To solve the fluid dynamics on such adaptive grids, the lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) offers distinct advantages [10]. As a mesoscopic method with a simple stream-and-collide algorithm, the LBM is computationally efficient and its inherent data locality makes it exceptionally well-suited for massively parallel computing. Crucially, the LBM operates on a uniform Cartesian structure within each refinement level of the tree-based grid. This provides a natural and seamless compatibility with the IBM, avoiding the complex interpolations required when coupling traditional Navier-Stokes solvers with IBM on non-uniform grids. The combination of LBM-IBM on adaptive grids is thus a powerful and efficient framework for interface-resolved simulations. While adaptive grids solve the resolution problem, their efficient parallelization presents challenges. For the Eulerian grid, tree-based structures are amenable to scalable partitioning using space-filling curves (SFCs), an approach leveraged by robust libraries like p4est [11, 12], which provides the foundation for our framework. Beyond the management of the Eulerian grid, however, coupling this framework with a large number of Lagrangian particles introduces another layer of algorithmic complexity. As particles advect across the domain, they frequently cross processor boundaries, necessitating efficient data migration. Furthermore, on a dynamically adapting grid, determining the specific grid cell (the “host cell") that contains each Lagrangian point becomes a non-trivial and potentially expensive task. A fast and scalable parallel search algorithm for locating these host cells is therefore essential to the overall performance of the simulation. This paper presents a highly scalable numerical method for simulating collisions of particles with large size disparities in turbulent flows, based on a LBM solver coupled with IBM on a dynamically adaptive octree grid. The main contributions of this work are: (i) The development and implementation of a robust LBM-IBM solver on a parallel adaptive tree-based grid, featuring an efficient and accurate communication scheme for both the fluid and the Lagrangian markers across coarse-fine grid interfaces. (ii) A systematic validation of the framework’s accuracy and parallel performance, demonstrating its capability to handle high-Reynolds-number flows around particles with significant computational cost savings compared to traditional uniform grid approaches. (iii) The application of this framework to the canonical problem of bubble-particle collision in both quiescent fluid and homogeneous isotropic turbulence (HIT), providing detailed, interface-resolved insights into the hydrodynamic interactions that govern capture efficiency. This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we detail the numerical methods, including the lattice Boltzmann method, the immersed boundary algorithm, and the governing equations for the dispersed phase. Section 3 extends these algorithms to the parallel, adaptive context. In Section 4, we present several validation cases that demonstrate the accuracy and scalability of our implementation. Finally, in Section 5, we apply the validated framework to investigate the complex dynamics of bubble-particle collisions, highlighting the method’s capability for studying complex multiphase systems. 

2. Numerical Methods 

2.1. Lattice Boltzmann method 

The fluid dynamics are solved using the LBM [13, 14], which has been widely adopted in many open-source frame-works [15, 16, 17]. The LBM describes the evolution of discrete-velocity distribution function, fi(x, t ), at the position 

x and time t, where the index i corresponds to a discrete velocity vector ci. The governing lattice Boltzmann equation (LBE) is given by: 

fi(x + ci∆t, t + ∆ t) = fi(x, t ) + [Ω i(x, t ) + Si(x, t )]∆ t (1) where ∆t is time interval that it takes for particles fi to travel across one lattice space. The left-hand side represents the streaming of populations to neighboring lattice nodes, and the right-hand side, Ωi(x, t ), is the collision operator. The simplest collision process is modeled using the single-relaxation-time Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook (BGK) operator [18]: 

Ωi(x, t ) = − fi − f eq i

τ (2) where τ is the relaxation time that controls the rate of approach to the equilibrium distribution function, f eq i . The equilibrium distribution, for a weakly compressible fluid, is a low-Mach number expansion of the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution: 

f eq i (x, t ) = wiρ



1 + u · ci

c2

> s

+ (u · ci)2

2c4

> s

− u · u

2c2

> s



(3) Here, wi are weight coefficients specific to the chosen lattice stencil, and c2 

> s

= (∆ x/ ∆t)2/3 is the lattice speed of sound, where ∆x is the lattice spacing. To incorporate the effects of an external body force F(x, t ), which is essential for coupling 2①②③④ ⑤⑥⑦⑧Figure 1: Schematic illustration of one collision-streaming loop on the coarse grid (level l0) and corresponding two collision-streaming loops on the fine grid (level l1). The gray grid indicate the grid at the refinement boarder, which hosts the virtual cell. cli indicates the collision step at grid level li and sli indicates the streaming step at grid level li.

the immersed boundary method, a discrete source term Si(x, t ) must be incorporated into Eq. (1). We adopt the well-established forcing scheme proposed by Guo et al. [19] for calculating this source term. The macroscopic fluid density ρ

and velocity u with are recovered by taking moments of the distribution functions: 

ρ(x, t ) = X

> i

fi(x, t ) (4) 

u(x, t ) = 1

ρ

X

> i

cifi(x, t ) + F∆t

2ρ (5) The fluid pressure is related to the density by p = c2

> s

ρ and the kinematic viscosity ν is determined by the relaxation time: 

ν = c2

> s

( 1

ω − 12 )∆ t (6) where ω = 1 /τ is the relaxation rate. In this work, we employ the D2Q9 lattice for two-dimensional simulations and the D3Q19 lattice for three-dimensional simulations [20]. The terminology D kQn refers to k dimensions and number n of discrete velocity vectors. 

2.1.1. LBM on adaptive grids 

Generalizing the LBM to adaptive grids requires a consistent treatment of interfaces between different refinement levels. Two approaches are commonly used: (i) employing a constant time step across all levels, which alters the local Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) number [21, 22], and (ii) maintaining a constant ratio between the grid spacing and the time step, which introduces space-time adaptivity (often referred to as acoustic scaling [23, 24] because the speed of sound remains constant). The latter can be achieved with temporal interpolation techniques [25] or volumetric formulations [26, 27]. In this work, we adopt the volumetric, cell-centered formulation proposed by Rohde et al.[27], which has been successfully implemented in High Performance Computing (HPC) codes like PEANO [28] and waLBerla[29]. Under acoustic scaling, the time step ∆t at a given refinement level l is proportional to the grid spacing ∆xl [30]. For the 2:1 refinement ratio used here, a coarse cell at level l evolves with a time step ∆tl, while its child cells at level l + 1 perform two complete collision-and-stream cycles using a time step ∆tl+1 = ∆ tl/2.Communication across refinement boundaries is managed through a layer of virtual cells embedded in the coarse cell adjacent to the interface (see grey region in Fig. 1). The procedure to synchronize the grid over one coarse time step ∆tl

is as follows (see Fig. 1): (i) Collision: Perform the collision step in both coarse and fine level of grids (step 1 and 2 in Fig. 1). (ii) Expansion: Post-collision populations from the coarse cell ( f ci ) are directly assigned to the overlapping virtual sub-cells ( f vi ), such that f vi = f ci . This equal interpolation is physically consistent, as the distribution functions 3represent densities (step 3 in Fig. 1). (iii) Fine Grid Sub-cycles: Two full collision-and-stream sub-cycles are performed on the fine grid. During streaming, populations are exchanged between real fine cells and the populated virtual cells (step 4-6 in Fig. 1). (iv) Coalescence: The final post-collision populations in the virtual cells are averaged and transferred back to the corresponding coarse grid cell. For a D-dimensional problem, these values are simply transferred by evaluating 

f ci = 12D

P f vi (e.g., f ci = 14

P f vi in 2D), ensuring strict mass and momentum conservation (step 7 in Fig. 1). (v) Coarse Grid Stream: The coarse grid performs its streaming step using the updated distribution functions from the coalescence step (step 8 in Fig. 1). To maintain physical consistency across refinement levels, quantities must be properly rescaled. With acoustic scaling, we have ∆xc = 2∆ xf and ∆tc = 2∆ tf (let f and c represent the quantities in fine and coarse grids). The speed of sound 

cs = ∆ x/ (√3∆ t) remains constant across all levels, ensuring that velocity in lattice units is continuous ( uc = uf ). The condition that the Reynolds number for a given flow should be grid independent, reads: 

Re c = ucLc/ν c = Re f = uf Lf /ν f , (7) this leads to the scaling relation of kinematic viscosity in lattice units across the grids: νf = ∆xc 

> ∆xf

νc. Combining with Eq. (6), these imply that the relaxation rate ω is scaled with each grid level [23]: 

ωf = 2∆ xf ωc

∆xf ωc + 2∆ xc − ∆xcωc

= 2ωc

4 − ωc

(8) A body force term, represented by a lattice acceleration a, must also be scaled to represent the same physical acceleration. This yields the relation: 

ac

∆xc

∆t2

> c

= af

∆xf

∆t2

> c

⇒ ac = af

∆tc

∆tf

⇒ ac = 2 af (9) 

2.2. Immersed boundary method 

In the IBM, it is assumed that the viscous fluid is filled in both inside and outside of the immersed boundary. To enforce the no-slip boundary condition, localized body forces are applied to the Eulerian lattice points near the fluid-solid interface. The specific methodology for determining these body forces varies among different IBM implementations [31]. In this work, we adopt the multi-direct-forcing scheme. This method is essentially an iterative extension of the standard direct-forcing scheme, designed to iteratively reduce the velocity slip at the boundary for enhanced accuracy. Let Xk and 

Uk denote the coordinates and the prescribed velocities of the N Lagrangian markers representing the moving boundary, respectively. Since the Lagrangian points Xk generally do not coincide with the Eulerian grid points x, interpolations between the two systems are required. Given the distribution functions fi at time t, an intermediate unforced velocity field u∗ is first obtained using Eq. (5) without the IBM forcing term. Subsequently, the momentum exchange between the boundary and the fluid is realized by the following three-step procedure, which is iterated multiple times within a single time step in the multi-direct-forcing scheme [32]: 

• interpolation of the velocity from the Eulerian grid x to the position of Lagrangian markers Xk(t):

u∗

> k

(Xk, t ) = X

> x

u∗(x, t )W (x − Xk)(∆ x)D (10) 

• computation of the body force term Fk for each Lagrangian marker Xk(t) according to the velocity of the immersed boundary, Uk:

Fk(Xk, t ) = ( Uk(Xk, t ) − u∗

> k

(Xk, t )) /∆t (11) 

• Spread, i.e. extrapolate, the force Fk from the Lagrangian markers Xk to the Eulerian grid x:

F(x, t ) = 

> N

X

> k=1

Fk(Xk, t )W (x − Xk)(∆ x)D (12) 

• Correct the velocity at the Eulerian grid point: 

u(x, t ) = u∗(x, t ) + F(x, t )/ρ (13) Where the function W is a weighting function proposed by Peskin [33], and D is the dimensionality. The weighting function W is given by: 

W (x, y, z ) = 1∆x ϕ( x

∆x ) · 1∆x ϕ( y

∆x ) · 1∆x ϕ( z

∆x ) (14) Here, the 3-points discrete delta function ϕ(x) is employed, which is given by: 

ϕ(x) = 

 

> 13

(1 + √1 − 3x2) 0 ≤ | x| ≤ 12 ∆x 

> 16

(5 − 3|x| − p−2 + 6 |x| − 3x2) 0.5∆ x ≤ | x| ≤ 1.5∆ x

0 1.5∆ x ≤ | x|

(15) 42.3. Dynamics of the Dispersed Phases 

The multiphase system considered in this work consists of two distinct dispersed phases: finite-size bodies fully resolved by the IBM, and small particles modeled using the point-particle model.    

> Figure 2: Flowchart of the recursive time-stepping algorithm for the coupled LBM-IBM solver on adaptive grids. The diagram illustrates how a coarse time step ∆tlis decomposed into two finer sub-steps ∆tl+1 . The IBM coupling operations are exclusively executed at the finest grid level ( lmax ).

2.3.1. Fully Resolved Finite-size Bodies 

In the present framework, the finite-size dispersed entities are modeled as rigid bodies. The translational and rotational dynamics of the finite-size bodies are governed by the Newton–Euler equations. Let xb, vb, and Ωb denote the centroid position, translational velocity, and angular velocity, respectively, of a body with mass mb, volume Vb, and moment of inertia tensor Ib. The equations of motion are: 

mb

dvb

dt = Fhyd + ( mb − ρf Vb)g, (16) 

d( IbΩb)dt = Thyd , (17) where g = −gez is the gravitational acceleration vector. The hydrodynamic force Fhyd and torque Thyd acting on the particle surface are computed directly from the immersed boundary forcing. In IBM, the force exerted by the fluid on the structure is the reaction to the force exerted by the structure on the fluid, which is given by the summation over all Lagrangian markers, Fibm = − PNk=1 Fk∆Vk (Vk is the volume element defined as S/N × δx where S is the total surface area of the body). However, this term is in general not equal to Fhyd , because a part of the forcing is used to drive the internal fluid inside the finite-size body [7, 34]. We note that this effect is always significant, and must be taken into account for an accurate dynamics description, independently of the mass density of the particle. This internal compensation forces and torques can be obtained by the time rate variation of linear momentum P and angular momentum L of the fluid internally located in the particle. Thus, we have 

Fhyd = −

> N

X

> k=1

Fk∆Vk + dP(t)dt (18) 

Thyd = −

> N

X

> k=1

(x − xb) × Fk∆Vk + dL(t)dt (19) 5An additional set of Lagrangian points Xin are located inside the body and move with it. They are used to calculate the linear and angular momenta of the internal fluid as follows: 

L(t) = ρf

ˆ

> x∈Γ

u(x, t )d x ≃ X 

> all Xin

u(Xin , t )∆ Vin (20) 

P(t) = ρf

ˆ

> x∈Γ

(x − xb) × u(x, t )d x ≃ X 

> all Xin

[Xin (t) − xb(t)] × u(Xin , t )∆ Vin . (21) where Γ is the closed domain inside the finite-size body. Here, we set the initial internal Lagrangian makers Xin (0) with the width of ∆xl=max , therefore, we take ∆Vin = (∆ xl=max )D .abcdef  

> Figure 3: Illustration of the parallel adaptive grid configuration for the LBM-IBM simulation of flow past a cylinder. (a) Grid-level distribution with three refinement levels. High resolution is concentrated near the cylinder surface (represented by Lagrangian markers Xk, shown as dots) and in the wake region. (b) Snapshot of the velocity field; note the grid is coarsened for visualization. (c) Domain decomposition among three MPI processes (Rank 0: Blue, Rank 1: Green, Rank 2: Red). (d–f) The local grid forests belonging to each MPI process. A layer of ghost cells from neighboring processes is explicitly maintained to enable the exchange of distribution functions at partition boundaries.

2.3.2. Point-like Particles 

In contrast to the finite-size particles, whose size is much larger than the typical flow scale, particles with sizes comparable to or smaller than η, can be modeled as point-like particles. While the current framework can accommodate two-way momentum coupling, we assume a one-way coupling regime for these microscopic particles herein, as their dilute concentration renders their feedback effect on the turbulent flow field negligible. The motion of a particle with density ρp

and radius rp = dp/2 is governed by the balance of inertia, hydrodynamic drag, and net gravity (buoyancy): 

mp

dvp

dt = 6 πμr pfp(u(xp) − vp) + ( mp − mf )g, (22) where vp is the particle velocity, u(xp) is the fluid velocity at the particle location, and mp = 43 πr 3

> p

ρp is the particle mass. The drag coefficient fp = 1+0 .15 Re 0.687  

> p

is the correction factor that accounts for nonlinear drag and is a function of particle Reynolds number ( Re p = 2 rp|u − vp|/ν ). The particle equations are integrated using a second-order Adams–Bashforth (AB2) scheme, with the fluid velocity u obtained via trilinear interpolation from the Eulerian grid. Crucially, the time integration is tightly coupled with the adaptive fluid solver: the particle time step ∆tp is dynamically adjusted to match the local fluid time step ∆tl corresponding to the refinement level l of the host cell where the particle currently resides. This ensures strict temporal synchronization between the dispersed phase and the multi-level carrier flow. A specific numerical challenge arises from the multi-step nature of the AB2 scheme, which relies on the right-hand side evaluation (i.e., the particle acceleration) from the previous time step. Because the adaptive framework employs level-dependent lattice units, a particle migrating across a refinement boundary carries the acceleration data scaled in the units of its 6previous host cell. To preserve physical and mathematical consistency, this previous-step acceleration must be explicitly rescaled (as per the acceleration scaling laws discussed in Section 2.1) to the local lattice units of the new refinement level prior to executing the AB2 time integration. 

2.4. Recursive Time-Integration Scheme on Adaptive Grids 

The temporal evolution of the coupled system is managed by a recursive time-stepping algorithm, following the strategy implemented in the waLBerla framework [35]. This scheme orchestrates the sub-cycling of the fluid solver, the force coupling of the IBM, and the particle updates across different refinement levels. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the algorithm performs a depth-first traversal of the grid hierarchy. For a simulation with a maximum refinement level lmax and a base level lmin , a single time step on a coarse level l involves two recursive sub-steps on the finer level l + 1 . This ensures that the acoustic scaling constraint ( ∆tl = 2∆ tl+1 ) is satisfied. A critical design choice in our framework is the treatment of the finite-size body. The immersed boundary calculations (velocity interpolation and force spreading) are strictly restricted to the finest grid level lmax . This is justified by our refinement criteria, which guarantee that the immediate neighborhood of any finite-size body is always fully resolved at 

lmax . Consequently, the IBM coupling routines are only invoked when the recursive cycle reaches the leaf nodes at the maximum depth of the tree. In contrast, the point-particle integration (as described in Section 2.3) is performed at the local level where the particle resides, ensuring synchronization with the local fluid time step. The synchronization between levels, specifically the exchange of distribution functions via the virtual cell layers and the coarse-fine interpolation, is performed immediately after the collision-streaming cycles of the respective levels, ensuring flux conservation across the adaptive mesh interfaces. 

3. Parallelization Approach and Implementation 

The present code structure employs a fully parallelized algorithm designed to efficiently handle large-scale simulations involving complex fluid–structure interactions. The implementation focuses on ensuring scalability, minimizing commu-nication overhead, and maintaining numerical consistency across distributed processes. This section outlines the core components of the parallel strategy, structured into three parts: (i) Grid management, which details the domain decom-position, dynamic adaptation, and data communication on the Eulerian mesh; (ii) Lagrangian data handling, focusing on the parallel storage and transfer of finite-size particles and Lagrangian markers in IBM; and (iii) The auxiliary grid forest constructed for the IBM, which facilitates the coupling between Eulerian and Lagrangian representations, and the computational efficiency. 

3.1. Grid Management and Domain Decomposition 

The use of adaptive tree-based grids significantly reduces the computational cost of simulating finite-size particle-laden flows. By restricting fine grid resolution to the immediate vicinity of particle boundary layers where high gradients exist, we could avoid over-resolving the background flow field, i.e., turbulence. The cell-centered LBM formulation adopted here is naturally compatible with tree-based data structures, allowing for efficient encoding of the grid hierarchy [36]. In this work, the computational domain is managed using the p4est library [11]. This library implements a dynamic forest of octrees (in 3D) or quadtrees (in 2D), enabling the domain to be viewed as a collection of trees that can be individually refined or coarsened. This structure supports massively parallel execution by leveraging SFCs, specifically the Z-curve (Morton order), to map the multi-dimensional tree structure onto a linear sequence of processes. The grid management, as illustrated in Fig. 3, involves three fundamental operations: refinement/coarsening , balancing , and partitioning .1. Refinement/Coarsening: The grid resolution is dynamically adjusted based on user-defined criteria. As shown in Fig. 3(a-b) for a flow past a cylinder, cells are tagged for refinement in regions of high velocity gradients or proximity to the immersed boundary. 2. Balancing: A 2:1 balance constraint is enforced for the algorithm of LBM in adaptive grids. This ensures that the size ratio between any two adjacent cells does not exceed 2, which is critical for the validity of the virtual cell interpolation schemes described in Section 2.1. 3. Partitioning: The computational load is distributed among MPI processes by cutting the linear SFC segment. Because SFCs preserve spatial locality, this method ensures that cells on the same process are geometrically close, thereby minimizing inter-process communication volume. Fig. 3(c-f) illustrates this domain decomposition for three MPI ranks. To facilitate the LBM streaming step across process boundaries, a layer of ghost cells is maintained (see Fig. 3(d-f)). These ghost cells store copies of the particle distribution functions fi from neighboring ranks. During each time step, a communication routine synchronizes these ghost layers, ensuring that the local LBM update remains consistent with the global flow field. 7Algorithm 1 search_host_cell(points): Algorithm for locating the cell containing a Lagrangian point, where 

M AXLEV EL = 30 refers to the maximum finest level for representing cells in p4est                                                                                       

> 1: for point in points do
> 2: isF ound ←f alse
> 3: for level in [lmin , l max ]do
> 4: test _cell =get _cell _at (point, level )▷Create a test cell based on the point location and level
> 5: for tree in trees do
> 6: idx ←binary _search( tree. quadrants , test _cell )▷Perform a binary search on the given tree based on Z-order
> 7: if idx ≥0then
> 8: point. host _cell _id ←idx
> 9: point. which _tree ←tree
> 10: isF ound ←true
> 11: break
> 12: end if
> 13: end for
> 14: if isF ound then
> 15: break
> 16: end if
> 17: end for
> 18: end for
> 19: function get _cell _at (point, level )
> 20: test _cell. level ←level
> 21: test _cell. x←point. x·2level ·2MAXLEVEL −level
> 22: test _cell. y←point. y·2level ·2MAXLEVEL −level
> 23: test _cell. z←point. z·2level ·2MAXLEVEL −level
> 24: return test_cell
> 25: end function

3.2. Lagrangian Data Management 

In our simulation framework, the Lagrangian phase encompasses four distinct categories of physical and numerical entities: (i) the point-like particles; (ii) the representations for finite-size bodies; (iii) Lagrangian markers Xk in IBM, defining the immersed boundaries; and (iv) internal Lagrangian points Xin , used for the calculation the linear and angular momentum of the IBM body. Given the potentially massive number of Lagrangian points ( Np), a distributed memory approach is essential. Each MPI process exclusively stores and updates the particles located within its local spatial subdomain to ensure memory scalability. A fundamental operation in this coupled framework is the host cell identification: for every time step, each Lagrangian point must be associated with the Eulerian grid cell (host cell) in which it is located in. This association is prerequisite for interpolating flow quantities (e.g., fluid velocity) to the particle and for spreading particle forces back to the fluid. On uniform structured grids, mapping a particle coordinate to a cell index is a trivial O(1) operation. However, on an unstructured or adaptive octree grid, the problem is non-trivial. A naive linear search, which checks every local leaf cell to see if it contains the particle, results in a computational complexity of O(NpNcell ) (Ncell is the number of grids). As the number of cells and particles grows, this approach becomes prohibitively expensive. To address this, we use an efficient search algorithm that exploits the intrinsic properties of the SFC used by p4est .The core idea is that the leaf cells are stored in a linearized array sorted by their Morton (Z-order) index. Therefore, instead of a geometric search, we perform an algebraic search: (i) Compute the leaf cell for the particle position at a given level; (ii) Perform a binary search over the sorted array of local leaf cells to find the cell that encompasses the cell; (iii) adjust the refinement level and repeat until the host cell is found. This strategy reduces the complexity from O(NpNcell )

to O(Np log Ncell ), ensuring scalability even for dense particle suspensions. The procedure is detailed in Algorithm 1. In a dynamic adaptive environment, particle data must be migrated between processors to maintain data locality. We distinguish between two scenarios requiring parallel communication, as illustrated in Fig. 4: 1. Post-Advection Communication (Particle Crossing): During a time step, particles update their positions based on the local velocity. A particle may cross the boundary of its current partition. Since the time step is limited by the converge condition, particles typically move only a short distance (less than one grid cell). Therefore, particles leaving the local domain will invariably land in the ghost layer region (see Fig. 3(d-f)). The communication strategy involves (see Fig. 4(a-c)): 

• Identify particles located in ghost cells. 

• Pack these particles into buffers destined for the corresponding neighbor rank (owner of the ghost cell). 

• Exchange data via MPI non-blocking point-to-point communication. 8Update grids Redistribute  

> Stepping Communicate

# a b cd e fFigure 4: Illustration of two types of parallel processes of Lagrangian points. Panels (a–c) show the redistribution of Lagrangian points across different MPI processes after the mesh update. The colors of the grid cells and points indicate the MPI ranks to which they belong, with pink, green, and blue representing ranks 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Panels (d–f) depict the communication of Lagrangian points between neighboring processes. 

2. Post-Refinement Redistribution (Grid Changing): When the mesh is refined, coarsened, or repartitioned for load balancing, the domain boundaries shift. A particle that was stationary may suddenly find itself belonging to a different MPI process because its host cell has been reassigned (see Fig. 4(d-f)). Unlike the advection case, the new owner might not be a direct spatial neighbor. To handle this: 

• For every particle, we compute its Morton code and determine the expected owner rank by comparing the code against the global SFC partition range of each process (which is available on all ranks). 

• Particles that no longer belong to the local rank are collected and migrated to their new owners. Details of the procedures are illustrated in Algorithm 2. Both procedures ensure that after every sub-step of the simulation, the Lagrangian particles are strictly resident on the process that owns their Eulerian host cell, preserving the efficiency of the coupled solver. To quantitatively evaluate the impact of the search algorithm on the parallel performance, we conduct a benchmark simulation featuring a simple shear flow in a domain discretized by 64 3 grid cells, uniformly seeded with 

Np = 10 7 Lagrangian point particles. Figure 5 presents the computational speedup achieved specifically during the La-grangian data communication step, compared against a baseline utilizing a naive linear search. The results demonstrate a tremendous acceleration in the overall data migration process. It is worth noting that the speedup declines as the number of processors increases. This is primarily because the local grid size per process shrinks, which reduces the computational burden of the naive linear search, thereby narrowing the efficiency gap between the two algorithms. Furthermore, at higher processor counts, the fixed overhead of MPI data transfer accounts for an increasingly larger fraction of the total communication step, diluting the relative computational speedup gained solely from the optimized host-cell identification. This highlights that optimizing the host-cell identification effectively eliminates the primary bottleneck in particle commu-nication, directly reflecting the algorithmic improvement from O(NpNcells ) to O(Np log Ncells ), and thereby confirms the efficiency of the proposed method for managing and communicating dense particle suspensions in parallel environments. 

3.3. Auxiliary Grid for Efficient Lagrangian Tracking 

In standard LBM-IBM implementations, the Lagrangian markers typically interact directly with the primary fluid grid. However, in turbulent flow simulations, the fluid grid often requires extensive refinement in wake regions and shear layers far from the particles themselves. This results in a massive number of Eulerian leaf cells ( Nf luid ), which significantly increases the computational cost of the host cell search algorithm described in Section 3.2, as the search complexity scales with log (Nf luid ). To overcome this bottleneck, we introduce a dual-mesh strategy. In addition to the primary adaptive 9Figure 5: The speedup of the proposed algorithm for the Lagrangian data communication step compared with the communication step using plain linear searching. 

mesh for the LBM solver, an auxiliary grid forest is constructed specifically for the immersed boundary method, leveraging the p4est_build infrastructure. As illustrated in Fig. 6, this auxiliary forest is structurally distinct from the fluid mesh: (i) Sparsity: The auxiliary grid is designed to be globally sparse. It remains at the coarsest possible level throughout the domain, except in the immediate vicinity of the Lagrangian markers in IBM. (ii) Targeted Refinement: Refinement in the auxiliary grid is driven strictly by the proximity to the IBM surface, independent of flow features like vorticity or velocity gradients. This strategy serves two critical purposes. First and foremost, it drastically accelerates the geometric search for Lagrangian points. Since the auxiliary forest ignores the complex refinement requirements of the background turbulence, its total cell count is orders of magnitude smaller than that of the fluid grid. Consequently, the host cell identification becomes significantly faster. Second, it simplifies the implementation of IBM-specific algorithms, enabling the Lagrangian–Eulerian coupling to be handled independently from the fluid solver’s adaptive mesh hierarchy. This separation provides flexibility in performing interpolation and spreading operations without interfering with the data structures of the LBM solver.    

> Figure 6: Comparison of the primary and auxiliary grid structures. (a) Representation of the grid cells: The left side shows the LBM fluid grid, which is refined in the wake to capture flow dynamics; the right side illustrates the auxiliary IBM grid, which is refined only near the particle interface (black line). (b) Hierarchical branching diagram of the corresponding octree data structures. The second-level nodes in the tree diagram correspond to the base-level cells of the LBM tree shown in (a). The active leaf cells are highlighted in color (green for the primary LBM tree and pink for the auxiliary IBM tree), whereas the intermediate, non-leaf cells are left uncolored. The auxiliary IBM tree exhibits a significantly reduced active cell count compared to the primary LBM tree, which facilitates much faster tree traversal and particle localization.

4. Validations 

In this section, we perform a series of simulations involving fixed and moving rigid particles in both two- and three-dimensional flows to verify the spatial convergence, accuracy, and robustness of the present method. The validation is carried out by comparing the numerical results with reference solutions available in the literature. 10 Algorithm 2 Parallel migration and communication of Lagrangian points among processes. The unified procedure handles both particle advection and adaptation through three main phases. (I) Pre-search: identify outbound points by either detecting crossings into ghost cells (for post-advection) or querying the global SFC partition map (for post-refinement redistribution). (II) Communication: exchange point data with the determined target processes. (III) Post-search: process the incoming points and determine the corresponding host cells in which they reside.                                                                         

> 1: (I) Pre-search: Identify outbound points and target processes
> 2: Initialize SendBuf f er and RecvBuf f er
> 3: for point in points do
> 4: search_host_cell( point )▷Locate the local host cell of the point using Algorithm 1
> 5: if point. host _cell _id >0then ▷A valid local host cell is found
> 6: continue ▷Keep the point in the local array
> 7: end if
> 8: ownerRank ←find _owner( point )▷Identify the owner rank of the point (in ghost layer or on a remote process)
> 9: SendBuf f [ownerRank ].push _back( point )▷Append the point data to the corresponding send buffer
> 10: points. erase( point )▷Remove this point from the local points array
> 11: end for
> 12: (II) Communication: Exchange data
> 13: Exchange buffer sizes with corresponding target processes
> 14: MPI_Isend /MPI_Irecv (SendBuf f er ↔RecvBuf f er )▷Perform non-blocking send/receive of buffers
> 15: MPI_Waitall () ▷Wait until all communication requests are completed
> 16: (III) Post-search: Process incoming points
> 17: for point in RecvBuf f er do
> 18: search_host_cell( point )▷Determine the exact local host cell of the incoming point using Algorithm 1
> 19: points. push _back( point )▷Add the point to the local points array
> 20: end for

4.1. 2D Oscillating Cylinder in a Quiescent Fluid 

To evaluate the method’s accuracy in handling moving boundaries with unsteady wakes, we consider the canonical problem of a circular cylinder oscillating in a stationary fluid. This benchmark has been studied experimentally and numerically by Dütsch et al. [37] and serves as a standard validation case for IBM implementations [32, 38]. The cylinder, with diameter Dc, is initially centered in the domain and undergoes harmonic oscillation in the transverse direction. The velocity of the cylinder center, ( Uc, V c), is prescribed as: 

Uc(t) = −U cos 

 2πt T



, (23) 

Vc(t) = 0, (24) where U is the velocity amplitude and T is the oscillation period. The flow is governed by the Reynolds number, 

Re = U D c/ν , and the Keulegan–Carpenter number, KC = U T /D c. The grid hierarchy ranges from a base level lmin = 7 

to a finest level lmax = 12 . At the finest level, the cylinder diameter is resolved with D = 80∆ xlmax .A hybrid dynamic refinement strategy is employed to optimize computational resources: (i) Distance-based refinement: To ensure high fidelity near the moving interface, the grid refinement level is strictly controlled by the distance to the cylinder surface. The finest resolution lmax is enforced within a specified envelope around the Lagrangian markers Xk.Beyond this region, the grid level gradually decreases (coarsens) as the distance from the boundary increases. (ii) Feature-based refinement: In the bulk flow, particularly in the wake region, grid adaptation is driven by the local flow gradients. Cells are tagged for refinement if the normalized velocity gradient exceeds a predefined threshold, ensuring that the shedding vortices are captured accurately even as they convect away from the body. The cylinder surface is represented by 357 Lagrangian markers. Additionally, internal Lagrangian points are distributed within the cylinder’s volume. These internal markers are utilized to compute the rate of change of momentum of the fluid enclosed by the immersed boundary, which is essential for the force coupling calculation in the present method. In the present study, we adopt the parameter set (Re = 100 , KC = 5) , following Dütsch et al. [37]. We compare our simulation results with the experimental measurements of Dütsch et al. [37]. Figure 7 shows the velocity profiles u

and v at three distinct phases ( ϕ = 180 o, 210 o, and 330 o, where ϕ = 2 πt/T ). The numerical predictions (solid lines) show excellent agreement with the experimental data (symbols) across all phases and locations. The method accurately captures the complex unsteady features, including the flow reversal and the velocity peaks in the wake. The temporal evolution of the drag coefficient CD is presented in Fig. 8, showing that our results closely match those reported by Dütsch et al. [37]. 11 Figure 7: Velocity profiles for three different phase angles (a) ϕ = 180 o, (b) ϕ = 210 o, (c) ϕ = 330 o for the case Re = 100 and KC = 5 . Lines are the present numerical results, and symbols are the experimental results by Dutsch et al.[37]. Data with different symbols indicate different location. 

4.2. Settling of a Sphere in a Closed Container 

To validate the framework’s capability in simulating three-dimensional fluid–structure interactions with significant particle translation, we simulate the sedimentation of a spherical particle in a fluid-filled container. This problem corre-sponds to the experimental benchmark provided by ten Cate et al. [39], who utilized particle image velocimetry (PIV) to measure the particle trajectory and velocity. A sphere of diameter Dp is released from rest in a rectangular container. The sphere accelerates under gravity until it approaches the bottom wall, where hydrodynamic lubrication forces cause it to decelerate. The problem is governed by the density ratio ρp/ρ f and the particle Reynolds number Re = u∞Dp/ν , based on the terminal settling velocity u∞. The simulation parameters for the selected test cases are summarized in Table 1. To comprehensively assess our framework, the simulations for this problem are conducted in two stages: a baseline validation for physical accuracy, and a sensitivity analysis for computational efficiency. For the baseline validation of the fluid-structure interaction, we employ a uniformly refined grid at the maximum resolution level ( lmax = 9 ). At this level, the sphere diameter is resolved with Dp = 48∆ x, which provides sufficient resolution to accurately capture the boundary layer dynamics. No-slip boundary conditions are imposed on all container walls. We note that in the original experiment [39], the top boundary was a free surface. However, following previous numerical studies [34, 40], we model the top surface as a rigid no-slip wall. Given the sufficient distance of the top wall from the sphere’s initial position, this approximation has a negligible effect on the settling dynamics. For the subsequent evaluation of the adaptive mesh algorithm, we utilize a dynamic octree grid with a coarse base level of lmin = 7 , allowing dynamic refinement up to 

lmax = 9 . In this adaptive setup, refinement is applied dynamically based on two criteria: (i) a geometric envelope ensuring maximum resolution around the sphere interface, and (ii) a flow-based criterion where cells are refined if the normalized local velocity gradient, |∇ u|/(u∞/D p), exceeds a specified threshold ϵref . Here, u∞ denotes the reference maximum settling velocity obtained from the uniform fine-grid baseline. To maintain a consistent refinement sensitivity across the non-uniform mesh, the applied threshold is dynamically rescaled according to the local grid level. To avoid numerical instabilities associated with under-resolved lubrication forces at the exact moment of impact, the simulation is terminated when the gap between the particle and the bottom wall falls below 2∆ xlmax .Figures 9(a) and 9(b) compare the time evolution of the settling velocity and the particle’s vertical position obtained from simulations with uniform grids against the experimental data of ten Cate et al. [39]. The simulation results (solid lines) show excellent agreement with the experiments (symbols) throughout the entire process: the initial acceleration, the steady settling phase, and the deceleration due to the wall effect. 12 Figure 8: Temporal evolution of the drag coefficient ( CD ) for an oscillating circular cylinder for Re = 100 and KC = 5 . The present results are compared against the numerical reference data of Dütsch et al.[37].    

> 
>   
> 

##    

> 
>    
>    

## a b c     

> 10 -2 10 -1 10 0

# 0ref              

> 10 -3 10 -2 10 -1
> "u1=u 1
> Re p= 4 :1
> Re p= 11
> Re p= 32
> Figure 9: Comparison of numerical results with the experimental data of ten Cate et al. [39] for sphere sedimentation. (a) Time evolution of the vertical settling velocity. (b) Time evolution of the particle height (distance to bottom). (c) Normalized error in terminal velocity as a function of the grid refinement threshold ϵref , demonstrating the convergence of the adaptive method to the uniform grid solution.

Building upon this validated baseline, we then quantify the trade-off between computational cost and accuracy in-troduced by the adaptive mesh by performing a sensitivity analysis on the refinement threshold ϵref . A lower threshold results in a larger refined region (filling more of the wake), while a higher threshold leads to a sparser grid. Figure 9(c) illustrates the normalized error ∆u∞ = |umax − u∞| in the maximum terminal velocity as a function of the refinement threshold. The results demonstrate that the adaptive grid method converges to the uniform grid solution as the threshold is reduced, allowing us to achieve high accuracy with a significantly reduced total cell count. 

> Table 1: Physical parameters for the sphere sedimentation cases, corresponding to the experiments of ten Cate et al. [39].

Case ρp (kg /m3) ρf (kg /m3) ν (m 2/s) Re 

1 1120 965 2.2 × 10 −4 4.1 2 1120 962 1.17 × 10 −4 11.6 3 1120 960 6.04 × 10 −5 31.9 

5. Application: Bubble-Particle Collision Dynamics 

In this section, we apply the proposed computational framework to investigate the hydrodynamics of bubble-particle collisions, a fundamental process governing the capture efficiency in froth flotation. In typical flotation cells, the bubble Weber number is generally low, indicating that surface tension dominates over inertial forces, thereby maintaining the bubble’s spherical shape. Furthermore, industrial systems invariably contain surface-active agents (surfactants) and fine particles that accumulate at the interface. This contamination immobilizes the gas-liquid interface, rendering it essentially rigid with a no-slip boundary condition [41, 42, 5]. Consequently, it is physically justified to model the bubbles as finite-size rigid spheres. This problem poses a unique multi-scale challenge: 13 a b    

> 0100 200 300 00.5 11.5 22.5 3

## c

2Figure 10: (a) Drag coefficient CD of the bubble as a function of Reynolds number Re b. The solid line represents the standard empirical correlation [44]. (b) Collision efficiency Ec versus particle-to-bubble radius ratio rp/r b for different Re b, demonstrating the square-law scaling. (c) The proportionality coefficient αc, extracted from the power-law fits Ec = αc(rp/r b)2, as a function of Re b. Open circles denote present simulation results; the dashed line indicates the theoretical prediction by Weber and Paddock [45]. 

the bubble diameter ( db) is typically much larger than the dissipative scales of the flow, requiring fully resolved fluid-structure coupling (IBM), whereas the mineral particles ( dp) are orders of magnitude smaller and are commonly treated as Lagrangian point masses. Our LBM-IBM-AMR framework is well-suited to overcome these inherent simulation challenges. 

5.1. Bubble-Particle Collision in Quiescent Flow 

We first consider the collision between a rising bubble and inertialess particles in a quiescent fluid. This deterministic case serves as a critical benchmark for validating the framework’s capability to capture the fine-scale hydrodynamic interactions (specifically, the interception mechanism) in the boundary layer. We simulate a spherical bubble of diameter db rising at a constant terminal velocity Vb. To facilitate long-time integration, we employ a reference frame attached to the bubble: the bubble is fixed at the center of the domain, and a uniform downward flow U∞ = Vb is imposed at the inlet. The flow regime is characterized by the bubble Reynolds number, Re b = Vbdb/ν . We focus on the range 20 ≤ Re b ≤ 150 , where the wake remains steady and axisymmetric. The particles are seeded near the inlet only after the flow has reached a steady state. A collision event is registered and counted whenever the center-to-center distance between a particle and the bubble falls below their combined radii, i.e., 

|xb + xp| ≤ rp + rb. The particles are assumed to be non-inertial (Stokes number St p ≪ 1), meaning they strictly follow the fluid streamlines. The collision process is thus governed by the particle-to-bubble size ratio rp/r b and Re b.A major computational challenge in this problem is the conflicting requirement for domain size and resolution. On one hand, the domain size L must be sufficiently large to minimize blockage effects, which significantly alter the drag and collision dynamics at low Reynolds numbers. Magnaudet et al. [43] suggested L ≥ 40 rb for accurate results. On the other hand, accurately resolving the thin boundary layer at the bubble surface requires a very fine mesh, with the resolution requirement scaling as ≃ Re 1/2 

> b

[9]. Discretizing such a large domain uniformly with the fine resolution required at the interface would be computationally prohibitive. Here, the adaptive grid strategy is indispensable. We set the domain size to a cubic box of length L = 40 .96 db. The grid is dynamically refined near the bubble surface (level lmax = 12 )and coarsened in the far field ( lmin = 8 ). The dynamic adaptation in the bulk flow is driven by the normalized velocity gradient. We employ a refinement threshold of ϵref = 0 .1. This specific threshold is selected based on the sensitivity analysis performed in the sphere sedimentation validation (Section 4.2), where it was demonstrated to yield a relative error of merely 1% compared to the uniform fine-grid benchmark. This configuration yields a resolution of approximately 50 grid points per bubble radius ( rb/∆x = 50 ) at the interface, ensuring high-fidelity capture of the interception trajectories, while maintaining computational efficiency. The computational advantage is evident in the total grid count. The adaptive simulation peaked at 4 × 10 6 grid points, whereas an equivalent uniform grid would require 6.9 × 10 10 grids points. This corresponds to a massive reduction in memory requirements, with the adaptive grid using merely 0.006% of the resources of a uniform approach. We first validate the flow field by examining the drag coefficient for the bubble, which is defined as CD = 2 Fd/(ρf U 2

> ∞

πr 2 

> b

)

(Fd is the drag force). Figure 10(a) compares the computed CD against the standard empirical correlation for rigid spheres [44]. The simulation results show excellent agreement with the empirical curve, confirming that the adaptive mesh accurately resolves the velocity gradients at the bubble surface and the near-wake structure. The collision efficiency, Ec, is defined as the ratio of the number of particles that actually collide with the bubble to the number of particles flowing through the projected cross-sectional area of the bubble. For inertialess particles, the collision is driven by the interception mechanism. At the no-slip surface, the fluid velocity vanishes, and the velocity profile grows linearly with distance from the wall. Consequently, theoretical analysis for Stokes flow predicts that Ec scales with the 14 a b cd e

t= = 2               

> 0100 200 300 400 500
> hu i u i =2i=u 2
> 2
> 0510 15 20 25 30
> l= 8 uniform grids
> lmin = 8 adaptive grids
> 10 -2 10 -1 10 010 1

k12              

> 10 -10 10 -5 10 0
> E11  (k1 )=(u2
> 2 2)
> l= 8 uniform grids
> J imenez (1993)
> lmin = 8 adaptive grids
> 10 -2 10 -1 10 010 1

k12            

> 10 -10 10 -5 10 0
> E22  (k1 )=(u2
> 2 2)
> l= 8 uniform grids
> J imenez (1993)
> lmin = 8 adaptive grids
> 10 110 210 3

## Number of processors 10 010 1Speedup Present Ideal speedup Figure 11: (a) Temporal evolution of the normalized turbulent kinetic energy comparing the adaptive grid simulation (with a moving refinement zone) and a uniform grid benchmark. (b) Longitudinal and (c) Transverse energy spectra. The adaptive mesh results (solid lines) closely match the uniform mesh results (red dashed-lines) and the reference literature (blue dashed-lines). (d) Snapshot of the flow slice across the bubble center, with gravity pointing to the left. The upper half panel visualizes the instantaneous computational mesh, while the lower half displays the y-component of the vorticity ( ωy ). Particles that are destined to collide with the bubble during the simulation are shown in red.(e) Strong scaling performance of the turbulent application. Here, the speedup is evaluated relative to the 32-processor baseline, defined as       

> Speedup (N) = t(32) /t (N), where t(N)is the computational time using N processors. The solid line represents the ideal speedup.

square of the size ratio, i.e., Ec ∝ (rp/r b)2 [5]. For finite Reynolds numbers, Weber & Paddock [45] proposed a correction to account for the boundary layer thickness: 

Ec = 32

 rp

rb

2 

1 + 3/16 Re b

1 + 0 .249 Re 0.56 

> b



. (25) Figure 10(b) plots the computed collision efficiency as a function of the size ratio rp/r b for various Re b. A clear power-law scaling with an exponent of 2 is observed , consistent with the theoretical interception mechanism. To quantitatively evaluate the influence of the bubble Reynolds number, we fit the simulation data for each Re b using the relation Ec =

αc(rp/r b)2. The extracted proportionality coefficient, αc (which effectively represents the normalized collision efficiency 

Ec/(rp/r b)2), is plotted as a function of Re b in Figure 10(c). Our results (open circles) show good agreement with the theoretical prediction (dashed line) and are consistent with previous body-fitted mesh simulations [46]. This validation demonstrates that our Cartesian-grid-based LBM-IBM framework, augmented by adaptive refinement, achieves accuracy comparable to body-fitted methods for delicate near-wall particle tracking problems. 

5.2. Bubble-Particle Collision in Isotropic Turbulence 

We now extend our framework to the simulation of bubble-particle interactions in homogeneous isotropic turbulence (HIT). The background turbulent flow is generated and sustained using a large-scale linear forcing scheme [47]. This method injects energy into the low wavenumbers at a rate that balances the viscous dissipation, ensuring that the resulting turbulence is statistically stationary, homogeneous, and isotropic. The flow is characterized by the Taylor microscale Reynolds number, Re λ = u′λ/ν , where u′ is the single-component root-mean-square (r.m.s.) fluid velocity and λ =p15 νu ′2/ε is the Taylor microscale, with ε being the mean energy dissipation rate. Before introducing the dispersed phases, it is imperative to verify that the dynamic grid adaptation does not introduce spurious artifacts or degrade the spectral properties of the turbulence, i.e., specifically the transfer of energy across refine-ment boundaries. To this end, we perform a precursor simulation in a cubic domain with periodic boundary conditions. 15 Instead of a physical bubble, we impose a "phantom" spherical refinement region with a radius of 10 η (where η is the Kolmogorov length scale) that translates through the domain. This forces the grid to dynamically refine to level lmax = 10 

inside the sphere and coarsen to lmin = 8 outside, mimicking the mesh topology of a moving bubble simulation. The target Reynolds number is set to Re λ = 64 .Figure 11(a) compares the time evolution of the normalized mean kinetic energy, ⟨uiui/2⟩/u 2 

> η

, obtained from the adaptive grid simulation against a benchmark simulation using a uniform static grid at level l = 8 . The adaptive case maintains the same stationary energy level as the uniform case, confirming that the dynamic refinement process is energy-conservative. Furthermore, the longitudinal and transverse energy spectra, shown in Figs.11(b) and (c), exhibit excellent agreement between the adaptive and uniform grid results. Both spectra correctly reproduce the dissipative range scaling consistent with literature data [48]. This validation confirms that our adaptive framework can sustain realistic turbulent fluctuations without introducing numerical dissipation or aliasing errors at grid interfaces. Having validated the carrier phase, we proceed to the full application of bubble-particle collisions. We seed 20 fully contaminated bubbles (corresponding to a volume fraction of 0.5 %) and 10 6 inertial point particles into the developed turbulence at Re λ = 64 . The size ratio between the particles and bubbles is rp/r b = 0 .1. The bubbles are resolved with 40 grid points per diameter ( db/η = 5 ) at the maximum refinement level lmax = 10 , while the background turbulence is captured at lmin = 8 . It should be noted that a full-scale production case typically involves higher Re λ and domain sizes, demanding higher computational resources. Consequently, the current setup is designed as a scaled-down, representative test case. Despite the reduced parameters, this configuration retains all the essential multiscale complexities of the physical process, serving to strictly demonstrate the framework’s coupled capabilities. Because the simulation domain is fully periodic in all directions, the non-zero net vertical force (buoyancy) acting on the rising bubbles would induce a continuous, unphysical acceleration of the bulk fluid. To prevent this artificial mean flow and ensure the turbulence remains statistically stationary, we require the net force exerted by the dispersed phase on the fluid to be zero on average [49, 50]. This is achieved by subtracting the instantaneous spatial average of the IBM forcing field from the local forcing at every time step: 

F(x, t ) = Fibm (x, t ) − ⟨ Fibm ⟩Π(t), (26) where ⟨Fibm ⟩Π(t) = 1

> || VΠ||

´ Fibm (x, t )d x represents the mean force density over the entire domain volume VΠ.With this numerically configuration, we evaluate the interaction dynamics. Figure 11(d) presents a cross-sectional snapshot through a bubble center, with the gravity vector pointing to the left. We explicitly mark the particles that eventually collide with the bubble in the subsequent time steps in red. It is clearly observed that the turbulent fluctuations sweep the particles and the colliding particles comes from a broad region ahead of the bubble, irregularly shaped upstream region compared to the deterministic trajectories in quiescent flow conditions. Finally, to demonstrate the parallel scalability of the framework, Fig. 11(e) evaluates the strong scaling performance of this full application up to 512 processors. As the number of processors increases, the computational load becomes increasingly heterogeneous, given that the intensive IBM operations and dense local grids are strictly tied to the dynamic bubble locations. Despite this inherent dynamic load imbalance, the continuous re-partitioning of the p4est octree ensures that the overall speedup remains robust, deviating moderately from the ideal linear scaling curve at the highest core counts. This confirms the framework’s capability to efficiently handle realistic, large-scale multiphase applications. 

6. Conclusions 

In this work, we have presented and validated a highly scalable computational methodology designed for the simulation of multiphase flows involving dispersed phases with large scale disparities. The computational framework couples the lattice Boltzmann method for the fluid dynamics, the Lagrangian particle tracking for point-like advected particles, and the immersed boundary method for finite-size moving bodies, all integrated within a dynamically adaptive octree grid structure managed by the p4est library. The primary objective was to overcome the computational bottlenecks associated with resolving thin boundary layers around large fast-rising or settling particles (e.g., bubbles) while simultaneously tracking massive numbers of microscopic inertial particles in a turbulent background flow. The key contributions and findings of this study are summarized as follows: First, we implemented a robust integrated methodology between the LBM and adaptive mesh refinement. By em-ploying a volumetric, cell-centered data structure with recursive time-stepping, we ensured strict conservation of mass and momentum across coarse-fine grid interfaces. The local grid refinement is based on flow gradients, concentrating computa-tional resources solely where high resolution is required. Second, to address the challenge of Lagrangian particle tracking on distributed, unstructured grids, we proposed an efficient parallel algorithm based on Space-Filling Curves. By using the Morton ordering of the octree, the host-cell search algorithm achieves a logarithmic complexity of O(Np log Ncells ),significantly outperforming bare geometric searches. Third, the accuracy and fidelity of the framework were rigorously validated against canonical benchmarks. In the case of an oscillating cylinder, the method accurately captured the un-steady forces and wake structures. In the sphere sedimentation case, the simulated trajectories matched experimental data. Finally, the framework was applied to the fundamental problem of large-bubble small-particle collisions in flotation 16 dynamics. The simulation of a rising contaminated bubble interacting with inertialess particles successfully reproduced the theoretical interception mechanism, recovering the expected Ec ∝ (rp/r b)2 scaling law and matching the theoretical predictions. Furthermore, the code was applied to the flow configuration of homogeneous and isotropic turbulence, sim-ulating fully resolved bubbles interacting with 10 6 inertial point particles. Most notably, the AMR strategy showcased immense efficiency in this complex scenario: the adaptive grid reduced the required computational resources by two orders of magnitude for the turbulent test case while maintaining efficient parallel performance. Moreover, the computational advantage is expected to become more pronounced at higher Re λ and bubble Re b, where the scale separation between the turbulence and the thin boundary layers inherently widens. In summary, the proposed LBM-IBM-AMR framework offers a powerful tool for investigating complex fluid-structure interactions where scale separation and computational efficiency are limiting factors. 

7. Code and Data Availability 

The underlying numerical framework relies on the open-source p4est library for adaptive grid management. The specific in-house implementations of the LBM-IBM coupling and the parallel Lagrangian tracking algorithms, as well as the data that support the findings of this study, are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 

8. Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant Agreement No. 950111, BU-PACT). We acknowledge the EuroHPC Joint Undertaking for awarding us access (Project EHPC-REG-2023R03-178) to the EuroHPC supercomputer Discoverer, hosted by Sofia Tech Park, Bulgaria. 

References 

[1] W. W. Grabowski, L. P. Wang, Growth of cloud droplets in a turbulent environment, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 45 (1) (2013) 293–324. [2] N. Fan, Q. Zhong, R. Nie, X. Liu, Interaction of various-sized particles in river flow, Sci. Rep. 13 (1) (2023) 10503. [3] V. Patočka, N. Tosi, E. Calzavarini, Residence time of inertial particles in 3D thermal convection: Implications for magma reservoirs, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 591 (2022) 117622. [4] J. Rubio, M. Souza, R. Smith, Overview of flotation as a wastewater treatment technique, Miner. Eng. 15 (3) (2002) 139–155. [5] A. Nguyen, H. J. Schulze, Colloidal Science of Flotation, CRC Press, 2003. [6] O. Kökkılıç, S. Mohammadi Jam, P. Chu, C. Marion, Y. Yang, K. E. Waters, Separation of plastic wastes using froth flotation–an overview, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 308 (2022) 102769. [7] M. Uhlmann, An immersed boundary method with direct forcing for the simulation of particulate flows, J. Comput. Phys. 209 (2) (2005) 448–476. [8] R. Verzicco, Immersed boundary methods: Historical perspective and future outlook, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 55 (1) (2023) 129–155. [9] T. A. Johnson, V. C. Patel, Flow past a sphere up to a Reynolds number of 300, J. Fluid Mech. 378 (1999) 19–70. [10] S. M. Guzik, T. H. Weisgraber, P. Colella, B. J. Alder, Interpolation methods and the accuracy of lattice-Boltzmann mesh refinement, J. Comput. Phys. 259 (2014) 461–487. [11] C. Burstedde, L. C. Wilcox, O. Ghattas, p4est: Scalable algorithms for parallel adaptive mesh refinement on forests of octrees, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 33 (3) (2011) 1103–1133. [12] T. Isaac, C. Burstedde, L. C. Wilcox, O. Ghattas, Recursive algorithms for distributed forests of octrees, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 37 (5) (2015) C497–C531. [13] S. Succi, The Lattice Boltzmann Equation: For Fluid Dynamics and Beyond, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2001. [14] K. Timm, H. Kusumaatmaja, A. Kuzmin, O. Shardt, G. Silva, E. Viggen, The Lattice Boltzmann Method: Principles and Practice, Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing AG (2016). 17 [15] E. Calzavarini, Eulerian–lagrangian fluid dynamics platform: the ch4-project, Software Impacts 1 (2019) 100002. [16] V. Heuveline, J. Latt, The OpenLB project: an open source and object oriented implementation of lattice Boltzmann methods, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 18 (04) (2007) 627–634. [17] J. Latt, O. Malaspinas, D. Kontaxakis, A. Parmigiani, D. Lagrava, F. Brogi, M. B. Belgacem, Y. Thorimbert, S. Leclaire, S. Li, et al., Palabos: parallel lattice Boltzmann solver, Comput. Math. Appl. 81 (2021) 334–350. [18] P. L. Bhatnagar, E. P. Gross, M. Krook, A model for collision processes in gases. i. small amplitude processes in charged and neutral one-component systems, Phys. Rev. 94 (3) (1954) 511. [19] Z. Guo, C. Zheng, B. Shi, Discrete lattice effects on the forcing term in the lattice Boltzmann method, Phys. Rev. E 65 (4) (2002) 046308. [20] Y. H. Qian, D. d’Humières, P. Lallemand, Lattice BGK models for Navier-Stokes equation, Europhys. Lett. 17 (6) (1992) 479–484. [21] A. Fakhari, T. Lee, Finite-difference lattice Boltzmann method with a block-structured adaptive-mesh-refinement technique, Phys. Rev. E 89 (2014) 033310. [22] A. Fakhari, T. Lee, Numerics of the lattice boltzmann method on nonuniform grids: Standard LBM and finite-difference LBM, Comput. Fluids 107 (2015) 205–213. [23] D. Lagrava, O. Malaspinas, J. Latt, B. Chopard, Advances in multi-domain lattice Boltzmann grid refinement, J. Comput. Phys. 231 (14) (2012) 4808–4822. [24] Y. Thorimbert, D. Lagrava, O. Malaspinas, B. Chopard, C. Coreixas, J. de Santana Neto, R. Deiterding, J. Latt, Local mesh refinement sensor for the lattice Boltzmann method, J. Comput. Sci. 64 (2022) 101864. [25] M. Geier, A. Greiner, J. G. Korvink, Bubble functions for the lattice Boltzmann method and their application to grid refinement, Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top. 171 (1) (2009) 173–179. [26] H. Chen, Volumetric formulation of the lattice Boltzmann method for fluid dynamics: Basic concept, Phys. Rev. E 58 (3) (1998) 3955. [27] M. Rohde, D. Kandhai, J. J. Derksen, H. E. Van den Akker, A generic, mass conservative local grid refinement technique for lattice-Boltzmann schemes, Int. J. Numer. Methods Fluids 51 (4) (2006) 439–468. [28] P. Neumann, T. Neckel, A dynamic mesh refinement technique for lattice Boltzmann simulations on octree-like grids, Comput. Mech. 51 (2) (2013) 237–253. [29] F. Schornbaum, U. Rude, Massively parallel algorithms for the lattice Boltzmann method on nonuniform grids, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 38 (2) (2016) C96–C126. [30] M. Schönherr, K. Kucher, M. Geier, M. Stiebler, S. Freudiger, M. Krafczyk, Multi-thread implementations of the lattice Boltzmann method on non-uniform grids for cpus and gpus, Comput. Math. Appl. 61 (12) (2011) 3730–3743. [31] M. Jiang, Z. Liu, A boundary thickening-based direct forcing immersed boundary method for fully resolved simulation of particle-laden flows, J. Comput. Phys. 390 (2019) 203–231. [32] K. Suzuki, T. Inamuro, Effect of internal mass in the simulation of a moving body by the immersed boundary method, Comput. Fluids 49 (1) (2011) 173–187. [33] C. S. Peskin, The immersed boundary method, Acta Numer. 11 (2002) 479–517. [34] Z. G. Feng, E. E. Michaelides, Robust treatment of no-slip boundary condition and velocity updating for the lattice-Boltzmann simulation of particulate flows, Comput. Fluids 38 (2) (2009) 370–381. [35] M. Bauer, S. Eibl, C. Godenschwager, N. Kohl, M. Kuron, C. Rettinger, F. Schornbaum, C. Schwarzmeier, D. Thönnes, H. Köstler, et al., walberla: A block-structured high-performance framework for multiphysics simulations, Comput. Math. Appl. 81 (2021) 478–501. [36] M. Mehl, M. Lahnert, Adaptive grid implementation for parallel continuum mechanics methods in particle simulations, Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top. 227 (14) (2019) 1757–1778. [37] H. Dütsch, F. Durst, S. Becker, H. Lienhart, Low-Reynolds-number flow around an oscillating circular cylinder at low Keulegan–Carpenter numbers, J. Fluid Mech. 360 (1998) 249–271. 18 [38] Z. Cheng, A. Wachs, An immersed boundary/multi-relaxation time lattice Boltzmann method on adaptive octree grids for the particle-resolved simulation of particle-laden flows, J. Comput. Phys. 471 (2022) 111669. [39] A. ten Cate, C. H. Nieuwstad, J. J. Derksen, H. E. A. Van den Akker, Particle imaging velocimetry experiments and lattice-Boltzmann simulations on a single sphere settling under gravity, Phys. Fluids 14 (11) (2002) 4012–4025. [40] Z. G. Feng, E. E. Michaelides, Proteus: a direct forcing method in the simulations of particulate flows, J. Comput. Phys. 202 (1) (2005) 20–51. [41] T. Chan, C. S. Ng, D. Krug, Bubble–particle collisions in turbulence: insights from point-particle simulations, J. Fluid Mech. 959 (2023) A6. [42] T. T. Chan, L. Jiang, D. Krug, A predictive model for bubble–particle collisions in turbulence, Chem. Eng. Sci. 321 (2026) 122850. [43] J. Magnaudet, M. Rivero, J. Fabre, Accelerated flows past a rigid sphere or a spherical bubble. part 1. steady straining flow, J. Fluid Mech. 284 (1995) 97–135. [44] V. L. Schiller, Uber die grundlegenden berechnungen bei der schwerkraftaufbereitung, Z. Vereines Deutscher Inge. 77 (1933) 318–321. [45] M. E. Weber, D. Paddock, Interceptional and gravitational collision efficiencies for single collectors at intermediate Reynolds numbers, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 94 (2) (1983) 328–335. [46] V. Sarrot, P. Guiraud, D. Legendre, Determination of the collision frequency between bubbles and particles in flotation, Chem. Eng. Sci. 60 (22) (2005) 6107–6117. [47] P. Perlekar, L. Biferale, M. Sbragaglia, S. Srivastava, F. Toschi, Droplet size distribution in homogeneous isotropic turbulence, Phys. Fluids 24 (6) (2012) 065101. [48] J. Jiménez, A. A. Wray, P. G. Saffman, R. S. Rogallo, The structure of intense vorticity in isotropic turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 255 (1993) 65–90. [49] K. Höfler, S. Schwarzer, Navier-Stokes simulation with constraint forces: Finite-difference method for particle-laden flows and complex geometries, Phys. Rev. E 61 (2000) 7146–7160. [50] A. Chouippe, M. Uhlmann, Forcing homogeneous turbulence in direct numerical simulation of particulate flow with interface resolution and gravity, Phys. Fluids 27 (12) (2015) 123301. 19