Title: 2608.03030v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.03030v1

Published Time: Wed, 05 Aug 2026 00:23:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 50

Markdown Content:
1

# Statistical Analysis of Droplet Size Distributions in Liquid -Jet -in -

# Crossflow Atomization 

# Tom Johny 1, Bharat Bhatia 2, Zafar Alam 1, Ashoke De 1∗   

> 1Department of Aerospace Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 208016, Kanpur, India.
> 2Current affiliation: Department of Mechanical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven 5600MB,
> Netherlands.

This study investigates the droplet size distribution (DSD) and atomization characteristics of a liquid jet injected 

into a crossflow (LJICF) under varied momentum flux ratios, Weber numbers, and flow conditions. Numerical 

simulations are performed using the validated compressible Volume of Fluid -Lagrangian Particle Tracking ( VOF -

LPT ) coupled framework to capture both the primary and secondary atomization processes. Key parameters, 

including momentum flux ratio, Weber number, crossflow pressure, and velocity , were analy zed to assess their 

impact on droplet size characte ristics, including Sauter mean d iameter (SMD) and standard deviation (STD) in 

the downstream region . The d iscre te size distribution of droplets comprising probability density and cumulative 

distribution reveal s a shift toward finer, more uniform droplets under enhanced breakup conditions. The findings 

emphasize the critical role of aerodynamic forces and instabilities in driving efficient atomization, with higher 

momentum flux ratios and Weber numbers leading to finer and more uniform droplets. Increased crossflow 

pressure promotes finer droplet formation but is found to reduce droplet density in the downstream domain due 

to a confined spray plume, delayed particle conversion , and reduced droplet residence time. The log -normal and 

Rosin -Ra mmler distributions effectively capture droplet size trends, with the former closely representing the 

skewness and tail behavior and the latter accurately representing intermediate a nd larger droplets. However, both 

have limitations in replicating sharp peaks and the smallest droplet sizes, respectively. 

Keywords: Droplet size distribution , Cumulative volume fraction, Probability density plot (PDP ), Spray 

atomization , Mean droplet sizes, Representative diameter s, L iquid jet in crossflow (LJICF) , VOF -LPT .

NOMENCLATURE 

𝑐 𝑝  Specific heat of the gas (J/Kg.K)  Greek symbols 

D32  Sauter mean diameter (μm)  𝛼 1 Volume fraction of liquid 

D10  Arithmetic mean diameter (μm)  𝜎  Surface tension (N/m) 

DN Nozzle diameter  𝜇  Dynamic viscosity (N.s/m 2)

Vj Liquid jet velocity (m/s)  𝜌  Mixture density (Kg/m 3)

Va Crossflow velocity (m/s)  𝑘  Thermal conductivity of gas (W/m.K) 

We  Weber number  𝛾  Specific heat ratio 

𝜇 𝑎𝑖𝑟  Dynamic viscosity of air (N.s/m 2)

𝜇 𝑗𝑒𝑡  Dynamic viscosity of liquid (N.s/m 2) Abbreviations 

P Pressure (Pa)  SMD  Sauter Mean Diameter (μm) 

q Momentum flux ratio  STD  Standard deviation 

𝑅𝑒 𝑝  Reynolds number  DSD  Droplet size distribution 

𝑆𝑐  Schmidt number  PDP  Probability density plot 

𝑆 ℎ Sherwood number  CDP  Cumulative distribution plot 

c Speed of sound (m/s)  LSA  Linear stability analysis 

_____________________________   

> a) Electronic mail: ashoke@iitk.ac.in

2

I. INTRODUCTION 

Droplet statistical analysis is essential for understanding and characterizing sprays, particularly in scenarios 

where liquid jets interact with high -velocity, high -temperature crossflows at elevated pressures. This phenomenon 

is critical in various engine ering applications, including fuel injection systems and advanced propulsion 

technologies such as gas turbines, afterburners, augmenters, and ramjet –scramjet combustors. The evaporation 

and subsequent combustion of fuel droplets in these systems are strong ly influenced by the droplet size distribution 

resulting from the b reakup and atomi zation process.  Errors in predicting droplet size distribution (DSD) can have 

significant engineering consequences. For instance, in scramjet combustors, inaccurate DSD prediction may lead 

to non -uniform evaporation and incomplete mixing 66 , which can trigger combustion instabilities and local flame 

blowout, or excessive pressure oscillations , all of which reduce engine efficiency and elevate pollutant emissions .

In gas turbines, underestimating the prevalence of large droplets can cause fuel -rich zones, incomplete 

combustion, increased unburned hydrocarbon emissions, and hotspots that damage turbine components 65 . In 

afterburners and augmenters, erroneous DSD modeling can result in excessive smoke formation or flame 

quenching due to improper fuel -air mixing. Additionally, combustion instability in liquid -fueled systems has been 

directly linked to the interplay between droplet size, atomization, and dynamic flow oscillations, highlighting the 

need for accurate DSD modeling to maint ain stable and clean combustion 67 . A comprehensive understandin g of 

the statistical parameters governing droplet behavior is , therefore , crucial for the accurate analysis and 

optimization of such flows. Droplet size plays a significant role in influencing evaporation rates, mixing 

efficiency, and combustion performance 28 . Smaller droplets with higher surface area -to -volume ratios , evaporate 

more rapidly , enhancing efficient fuel -air mixing, which is critical for stable and complet e combustion 11,26 . In 

applications such as spray cooling, droplet size distribution affects the cooling efficiency and uniformity, which 

are essential for effective thermal management 27 . Droplet size distribution is an important parameter in governing 

the flow of dispersed droplets in multiphase flow s involving spray atomizations. Therefore, optimizing droplet 

size distribution is critical for improving spray performance and ensuring overall system efficiency and reliability 

across various spray applications. 

The breakup dynamics of a liquid jet in crossflow (LJICF) is inherently complex, driven by interactions 

between the injected liquid jet and the perpendicular crossflow, leading to the primary and secondary atomization 

resulting in droplet formation 1,6,57 . The breakup process and resulting droplet size distribution are influenced by 

key parameters such as crossflow velocity, momentum flux ratio, and Weber number 22,29 . Studies have shown that 3

increasing the crossflow Weber number, which quantifies the balance between inertial and surface tension forces, 

enhances liquid jet breakup, producing a broader range of droplet sizes 10 ,32, 39 .

Numerical simulations have become an essential tool for studying the complex breakup dynamics in liquid 

jets in crossflow (LJICF), providing detailed insights into droplet formation under controlled conditions 32,60 . The 

Volume of Fluid (VOF) method 24,50 is particularly effective at capturing the initial gas -liquid interface during 

primary jet breakup, while Lagrangian Particle Tracking (LPT) accurately resol ves smaller droplets further 

downstream . Th e LPT framework, based on the PSI -CELL model 13 , enables accurate gas -droplet flows by 

coupling particle tracking with fluid dynamics. Subsequent refinements extended LPT’s applicability, including 

its adaptation for heat and mass transfer in combustion chambers 19 , modeling of high -pressure fuel sprays 46 , and 

incorporation of particle -turbulence interactions through two -way coupling 14 . The VOF -LPT coupled framework 

integrates both methods, offering a comprehensive representation of droplet formation, atomization, and transport 

in LJICF 6,21,49,56,59,61 . This approach effectively captures both the primary jet breakup and the downstream 

evolution of individual droplets, making it well -suited for analyzing droplet dynamics in complex LJICF 

scenarios. 

Experimental and computational approaches have significantly advanced our understanding of droplet 

dynamics in LJICF applications . Techniques such as Phase Doppler Interferometry (PDI) and high -speed imaging 

enable detailed measurements of droplet sizes, velocities, and trajectories. However, these methods often 

encounter limitations in resolution and sampling frequency , particularly in high -speed, dense spray regions 16,31, 41 .

To address these challenges, computational frameworks such as VOF -LPT are increasingly employed to 

complement experiments , providing a more comprehensive analysi s of droplet behavior in LJICF. Computational 

models have been used to investigate droplet breakup mechanisms 5, while coupled frameworks capture detailed 

droplet size characteristics under varying crossflow conditions. Despite extensive research on droplet breakup, 

high -speed imaging, and computational modeling of spray formation and dynamics, limited studies explicitly 

integrate experimental data with computational insights on dr oplet statistics using VOF -LP T. 

The primary and secondary atomization processes generate a large number of d roplets with varying sizes, 

resulting in a non -uniform droplet size distribution (DSD) 20 . Characterizing these droplet size variations is 

essential for evaluating atomization quality and spray performance . Researchers use d mathematical distribution 

functions to represent the DSD, which standardizes droplet size representation, smooth en s out statistical 

fluctuations, and enables meaningful comparisons across different spray conditions. Commonly employed 4

theoretical distributions include the Normal, Log -Normal, and Maximum Entropy distributions .53 Empirical 

distribution functions derived from experimental data, such as the Nukiyama -Tanasawa ,37 Rosin -Rammler ,48 and 

the upper -limit function distributions 36 , play a significant role in describing DSDs. Lefebvre and McDonell 28 

particularly recommended the Rosin -Rammler distribution for its effectiveness in representing broad droplet size 

distributions in industrial spray applications. Heywood 23 further emphasized that selecting an appropriate 

distribution function provides valuable insights into droplet spread and uniformity, which are crucial for 

optimizing spray performance. Recent studies have introduced a fractal distribution model for characterizing 

atomized droplets in crossflow, where droplet size distribution is represented by a fractal dimension (FD) that 

adapts to spray pressure and flow conditions 15 . This approach offers a standalone metric for assessing droplet 

uniformity and size, extending beyond conventional parameters such as SMD and SPAN, with promising 

applications in air purification, agricultural spraying, and combustion. 

Studies indicate that droplet size distributions in LJICF systems evolve downstream due to the influence 

of aerodynamic forces, coalescence, and secondary breakup. Prakash et al. 42 demonstrated that varied entry 

conditions impact dispersion, with turbulence promoting finer atomization. Recent studies have investigated the 

influence of injection orientation and orifice geometry on droplet size distributions and atomization characteristics 

of liquid jets in crossflow. Specifically, backward -injected jets and reduced injection angles intens ify aerodynamic 

interactions, thereby promoting faster breakup and producing smaller droplet sizes due to enhanced shear and 

instability -driven mechanisms 63 . Additionally, variations in orifice geometry, such as elliptical and square 

discharge shapes, significantly affect jet trajectories, breakup locations, and droplet sizes, with elliptical orifices 

oriented horizontally resulting in finer droplets and narr ower distributions compared to circular or square 

geometries 64 . Bai et al. 4 found that turbulent crossflows lead to wider dispersion and a broader droplet size 

spectrum, particularly in low -density flows . Shinjo and Umemura 55 observed that as droplets interact w ith the 

crossflow, the mean droplet size decreases while the distribution width increases . Further investigations by Bodoc 

et al. 8 and Prakash et al. 43 confirm ed these downstream variations, especially under swirling or oscillating 

crossflows, which introduce additional heterogeneity in droplet size s. This further highlights the role of swirl 

intensity and gas flow dynamics in enhancing droplet breakup and dispersion, adding complexity to the 

downstream droplet size di stribution . High -temperature and high -pressure studies of JICF , like those by Amighi 

and Ashgriz 2,3 highlight the influence of environmental factors on atomization and overall droplet size 

characteristics . Such variations are critical in applications like combustion and cooling, where precise control over 

droplet dispersion and size is essential for p erformance optimization. 5

Despite significant advancements in understanding LJICF atomization, gaps remain in the literature 

regarding the comprehensive comparison between computational predictions and experimental data, particularly 

in fitting DSDs . Farvardin and Dolatabadi 17 highlighted the challenges in reconciling computational and 

experimental results for biodiesel jets, revealing discrepancies in droplet size predictions. Mashayek and Ashgriz  

> 34

provide d foundational insights into how factors like Weber number, crossflow velocity, and momentum flux ,

shape DSD s in LJICF. However, m any studies rely on a limited set of distribution functions that may not fully 

capture the complex droplet dynamics observed in these scenarios. Furthermore, there is a limited understanding 

of the effects of momentum flux ratio, crossflow velocity, crossflow pressure, and Weber number on the 

cumulative, size , and volume distribution of spray droplets un der these varied conditions . Addressing these gaps 

would enhance the accuracy of droplet size predictions in LJICF applications and improve the reliability of 

numerical models. 

This study aims to provide a comprehensive investigation into the droplet size distribution (DSD) and 

atomization characteristics of a liquid jet in crossflow (LJICF) under varied flow conditions, including different 

momentum flux ratios, Weber numbers, cr ossflow pressures , and crossflow velocities. Using a validated VOF -

LPT coupled framework, the study captures both primary and secondary atomization processes, enabling detailed 

analysis of droplet size characteristics such as SMD and STD . The work focuses on evaluating the influence of 

aerodynamic forces and instabilities on droplet breakup and dispersion, emphasizing the role of key flow 

parameters in shaping the droplet size spectrum.  The study also examines probability density functions, 

cumulative distributions, and droplet velocity distributions to assess downstream variations in droplet 

characteristics under different flow conditions. Furthermore, by fitting droplet size data to est ablished distribution 

functions, this research provides critical insights into the statistical representation of droplets and evaluat es the 

effectiveness of these functions in characterizing the polydisperse nature of liquid sprays in cross -flow conditions. 

II. NUMERICAL METHODOLOGY 

This study employs a validated compressible VOF -LPT coupled framework 6 to simulate Liquid Jet in 

Crossflow (LJICF) . The VOF method captures liquid jet core deformation and primary breakup, while the LPT 

framework models secondary droplet breakup. Coupling is achieved through an image processing -Connected 

Component Labeling (CCL) algorithm adapted from Heinrich and Schwarze 21 . T he iso -Advector approach 47 is 

used for interface reconstruction and advection. The following sections outline the governing equations for both 

Eulerian and Lagrangian frameworks. 6

A. Eulerian F ramework 

The governing equations for mass, momentum, species, and energy are solved within an Eulerian 

framework to model the two -phase flow consisting of compressible, immiscible fluids. The VOF method tracks 

the liquid -gas interface , treating the mixture as a single fluid through a step function that represents the volume 

fraction of each phase within a computational cell: 

𝛼 1 = {

0 𝑝 ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒 2 (Gas )

0 < 𝛼 1 < 1 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑒 

1 𝑝 ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒 1 (Liquid )

(1) 

The mass conservation equation for phase k is:  

> 𝜕 (𝛼 𝑘 𝜌 𝑘 )
> 𝜕𝑡

+ ∇. (𝛼 𝑘 𝜌 𝑘 𝐮 ) = 𝑆 𝜌 |𝐿 + 𝑆 𝜌 |𝐸  (2) 

where u is the velocity,  𝑆 𝜌 |𝐿 accounts for mass transfer due to the vaporization of L agrangian droplets 62 , and  𝑆 𝜌 |𝐸 

represents the mass transfe r from the liquid to the gas phase . The integral form of the continuity equation is 

employed to calculate surface advection, while the total mass balance is expressed in differential form.  

> 𝜕 (𝜌 )
> 𝜕𝑡

+ ∇. (𝜌 𝐮 ) = 𝑆 𝜌 |𝐿  (3) 

For cells involving liquid -gas calculations, fluid properties are computed as the weighted average of the 

phase fraction α for each computational cell. 

𝜌 = 𝛼 1𝜌 1 + 𝛼 2𝜌 2 (4a) 

𝜇 = 𝛼 1𝜇 1 + 𝛼 2𝜇 2 (4b) 

where  𝜌 1, 𝜌 2 and  𝜇 1, 𝜇 2 are the density and dynamic viscosity for phases 1 and 2 , respectively. The velocity field 

is solved using a singl e momentum transport equation : 

> 𝜕 (𝜌𝑢 )
> 𝜕𝑡

+ ∇. (𝜌 𝐮𝐮 ) − ∇𝜏 𝑒𝑓𝑓 = −∇𝑝𝑑 − (∇𝜌 )𝐠 . 𝐱 + 𝐹 𝑆𝑇 + 𝑆 𝜌𝑢 |𝐿 + 𝑆 𝜌𝑢 |𝐸  (5) 

where  𝑝 𝑑  is the piezometric pressure , 𝜏 𝑒𝑓𝑓  is the effective stress tensor,  𝜇 𝑒𝑓𝑓  the effective viscosity volume 

averaged as:  𝜇 𝑒𝑓𝑓 = 4(𝛼 1𝜇 1+𝛼 2𝜇 2) 

> 3

, and  𝜌  in all the combined equations is the mixture density for each 

computational cell.  𝑆 𝜌𝑢 |𝐸 , 𝑆 𝜌𝑢 |𝐿  are the Eulerian and Lagrangian source terms for momentum equations, which 7

are generated because of the evaporation and the atomization of droplets in the domain. Using the Continuum 

Surface Force (CSF) model by Brackbill et al. 9 the surface tension force  𝐹 𝑆𝑇  is calculated as: 

𝐹 ⃗𝑆𝑇 (𝑥 ⃗ ) = 𝜎 ∫ 𝜅 (𝑦 ⃗ )𝑛 ̂ (𝑦 ⃗ )𝛿 (𝑥 ⃗ − 𝑦 ⃗ )𝑑𝑆 𝑆  (6) 

where σ is the liquid's surface tension, κ is the interface curvature,  𝑛 ̂ is the unit normal, and δ is the Dirac -delta 

function at position vectors at  𝑥 ⃗ and  𝑦 ⃗ . The curvature and normal are defined as  κ = −∇. 𝑛 ̂ , 𝑛 ̂ = 𝑛 ⃗⃗ 

> |𝑛 ⃗⃗|

, where  𝑛 ⃗⃗ =

∇𝛼 . The surface tension source term is expressed as: 

𝐹 𝑆𝑇 = 𝜎 𝜌𝜅 ∇𝛼  

> 1
> 2(𝜌 𝑙 +𝜌 𝑔 )

(7) 

For the gas phase, the isentropic equation of state is used 35 . 

> 𝑝
> 𝜌 𝛾

= 𝑎 𝑐 = constant  (8) 

(𝜕𝜌 

> 𝜕𝑝

)𝑠 

= 1 

> 𝑎 𝑐 𝛾

( 𝑝 

> 𝑎 𝑐

) 

> (1−𝛾 )
> 𝛾

(9) 

where  𝛾  is the ratio of specific heat and  𝑎 𝑐  is the isentropic constant. For the liquid phase , the relationship between 

density and pressure is :

𝜌 − 𝜌 𝑜 = 𝜓 (𝑝 − 𝑝 𝑜 ) , where  𝜓 = 1 

> 𝑐 2

= (𝑑𝜌 

> 𝑑𝑝

)𝑠 

(1 0)

where c is the speed of sound, and  𝜌 𝑜 , 𝑝 𝑜  are the reference density and pressure, respectively. The species transport 

equation is solved by assuming the liquid phase as a single component system and the gaseous phas e as a multi -

component system.  

> 𝜕 (𝛼 2𝜌 2𝑌 𝑘 )
> 𝜕𝑡

+ ∇. (𝛼 2𝜌 2𝐮 𝑌 𝑘 ) − ∇. (𝛼 2𝐷 𝑘 ∇𝑌 𝑘 ) = 𝑆 𝜌𝑌𝑘 |𝐿 + 𝑆 𝜌𝑌𝑘 |𝐸  (1 1)

where  𝑌 𝑘  and  𝐷 𝑘  are the mass fraction and coefficient of diffusion for the kth species in the gaseous phase. The 

energy equation for high -temperature evaporating conditions , formulated by Bhatia et al. 6 is:  

> 𝜕 (𝜌𝑇 )
> 𝜕𝑡

+ ∇. (𝜌 𝐮 𝑇 ) − ∇. (𝛼 𝑇 ,𝑒𝑓𝑓  ∇𝑇 ) + (𝜕 (𝜌𝐾 ) 

> 𝜕𝑡

+ ∇. (𝜌 𝐮 𝐾 ) + ∇. (𝐮 𝑝 )) ( 𝛼 1

> 𝑐 𝑣 ,1

+ 𝛼 2

> 𝑐 𝑣 ,2

) = 𝑆 𝜌𝑇 |𝐿  + 𝑆 𝜌𝑇 |𝐸  (12 )

𝑆 𝜌𝑇 |𝐸  = 𝑆 𝜌 |𝐸  ∗ 𝐿 (𝑇 𝑏 )/𝐶𝑝 𝑚𝑖𝑥  (13 )

𝑆 𝜌𝑇 |𝐿  = 𝑆 𝜌 |𝐿  ∗ 𝐿 (𝑇 𝑏 )𝐶𝑝 𝑚𝑖𝑥  (14 )8

Here, T is temperature,  𝛼 𝑇 ,𝑒𝑓𝑓  is effective thermal diffusivity, K is the kinetic energy, and cv1 , cv2 are 

specific heat capacities at constant volumes for phases 1 and 2 , respectively . L(T b) is the latent heat of vaporization 

at boiling temperature, and the terms S ρT ∣L and S ρT ∣E are used to enforce the saturation condition , which represent s

energy contributions due to phase change for Eulerian and Lagrangian droplets, respectively. More details on the 

energy equation and source terms are thoroughly explained in Johny et al. 36 . Although evaporation is negligible 

under the current low -temperature conditions, the framework is designed to incorporate its influence within both 

Eulerian and Lagrangian domains. 

Turbulence is modeled using a one -equation eddy viscosity subgrid -scale (SGS) model, specifically the 

LES dynamic k-equation model . The governing partial differential equations are solved numerically using the 

finite volume method (FVM) in the OpenFOAM -v1912 platform 38 . A second -order total variation diminishing 

(TVD) scheme is used for convective fluxes, while a second -order central scheme is applied to viscous fluxes. 

Time integration is performed using a first -order implicit Euler scheme with sufficiently small time st eps to ensure 

numerical stability and minimize numerical diffusion. 

B. Lagrangian Framework 

In th e LPT method, liquid droplets are treated as point particles possessing mass and momentum but are 

devoid of volume. To efficiently represent dispersed droplets, the method employs parcels -groups of droplets with 

similar properties such as size, velocity, temperature, and thermophysical characteristics . The parcel position and 

velocity are updated iteratively at each time step using the Basset -Boussinesq -Oseen (BBO) equation 40 : 

> 𝑑 𝐱 𝑝
> 𝑑𝑡

= 𝐮 𝑝  (15 )

𝑚 𝑝  

> 𝑑 𝐮 𝑝
> 𝑑𝑡

= 𝐅 𝐷 + 𝐅 𝐺  (16 )

where  𝐱 𝑝 , 𝑚 𝑝  and  𝐮 𝑝  denote the particle position, mass, and velocity, respectively. The drag force  𝐅 𝐷  and 

gravitational forces  𝐅 𝐺  (body forces including buoyancy effects ) acting on each particle is given by: 

𝐅 𝐷 = 𝐶 𝐷  

> 𝜋 𝐷 𝑝
> 2
> 8

𝜌𝑔 (𝐮 𝑔 − 𝐮 𝑝 )|𝐮 𝑔 − 𝐮 𝑝 | (17 )

𝐅 𝐺 = 𝑚 𝑝 𝑔 (1 − 𝜌 𝑔 

> 𝜌 𝑝

) (18 )9

where D p is the parcel diameter , and  𝐮 𝑔  and  𝐮 𝑝  are the velocities of the gas phase and Lagrangian parcels ,

respectively. The drag coefficient CD is calculated using the Schiller -Naumann correlation 51 :

𝐶 𝐷 = {24 (1 + 0.15 (𝑅𝑒 𝑝 )0.687 )/𝑅𝑒 𝑝 𝑅𝑒 𝑝 ≤ 1000 

0.44 𝑅𝑒 𝑝 > 1000  (19 )

Re𝑝 = 𝜌 2|𝐮 𝑔 −𝐮 𝑝 |𝐷 𝑝 

> 𝜇 2

(20 )

where  𝑅𝑒 𝑝  is the droplet Reynolds number , and  𝜇 2 is the gas phase dynamic viscosity . The LPT framework models 

various droplet phenomena, including breakup, heat transfer, and evaporation. Heat transfer calculations utilize 

the Ranz -Marshall model 44 , while evaporation, assuming spherical Lagrangian droplets, is determined using the 

Frössling correlation 18 :

𝑆 ℎ = 2 + 0.552 𝑅 𝑒 𝑝 1/2𝑆 𝑐 1/3 (21)

where the Sherwood number ( Sh ) represents the ratio of the convective mass transfer coefficient (h c) times the 

droplet diameter ( dp) to the characteristic length scale ( D). The droplet Reynolds number ( Re p) and the Schmidt 

number ( Sc ) significantly influence the evaporation rate. The turbulent Schmidt number ( or Prandtl number), 

which typically rang es from 0.7 to 1, is set to 0.85 in this study. 

The secondary breakup of Lagrangian parcels induced by aerodynamic shear forces is modeled using the 

Reitz -Diwakar breakup model 45,46 , wherein droplets exceeding a critical Weber number undergo either bag or 

stripping breakup, producing smaller droplets from the parent parcels. The breakup frequency is calculated based 

on droplet diameter, the relative velocity between droplets and gas phase, and specific model constants: Cbag =6.0 ,

Cb=0.78 , Cstrip =0.5 , and Cs=10.0 . Additionally, droplet collision and coalescence phenomena are accounted for 

through the Schmidt and Rutland 52 trajectory collision model. 

C. Coupling Algorithm 

The coupling between the compressible VOF and LPT frameworks, facilitating the transition of droplets 

from Eulerian to Lagrangian , is based on the methodology formulated by Heinrich & Schwarze 21 . The individual 

droplets in the 3D Eulerian framework are identified using the CCL algorithm. Droplets satisfying predefined size 

and shape criteria , specifically with a maximum droplet diameter of 280 μm and a maximum sphericity of 1.47 ,

are converted into Lagrangian parcels .1,2 Droplets exceeding these thresholds are retained in the Eulerian 

framework, as larger droplets typically exhibit continued deformation and may und ergo subsequent breakup 10 

downstream. The maximum sphericity cutoff applied here is experimentally determined, serving to effectively 

exclude ligaments and irregularly shaped droplets from the analysis . The present study adopted a one -way 

coupling approach, allowing the conversion from Eulerian droplets to Lagrangian parcels but not vice versa. 

D. Domain Specification, Boundary Conditions , and Solution Parameters 

The computational m odel has been previously validated in Bhatia et al. 6. A 3 D computational domain 

replicating the e xperimental channel , as depicted in Fig. 1 (a) , is employed, with c alculations for D 32 and STD 

performed in the downstream sub -domain. The liquid jet (Dₙ = 572 μm, water at 25 °C) is injected into an air 

cross -flow (25 °C) under a fully developed turbulent inlet profile, while the jet nozzle imposes a uniform velocity 

profile. Detailed fluid properties and simulation parameters are presented in Tables I and II. Wave -transmissive 

conditions are applied at the outlet, and all solid walls are treated as no -slip, adiabatic with k-q-R wall functions.    

> (a) (b)
> FIG 1. (a) Computational domain meshed with 0.75 million cells (b) Iso -contour value

 =0.5 representing Eulerian part 

> (violet), and discrete droplets indicate lagrangian droplets

The base mesh consists of 140 × 60 × 80 cells, refined near the injector using a multi -level refinement 

approach via snappyHexMesh , achieving a resolution ranging from 26 -418 μm and yielding a 0.75 -million -cell 

parent mesh. Adaptive mesh refinement enhances interface resolution, while dynamic grid adjustments, including 

buffer layers, accommodate droplet formation and movement , as shown in Fig. 1 (b) . The mesh dynamically 

adapts to interface evolution, reverting to the base mesh cell size upon Eulerian → Lagrangian conversion to 

maintain consistency with Lagrangian assumptions. To ensure numerical stability, the simulation operates under 

a strict Courant –Friedrichs –Lewy (CFL) constraint (CFL < 0.12) . Buffer layers near Eulerian droplets facilitate a 

gradual transition in cell size, preventing numerical instabilities. The total cell count varies dynamically between 

0.75 and 3–5 million .11  

> TABLE I. Summary of fluid properties

Fluid Property  P=2.1 bar, T=25 oC P=3.8 bar, T=25 oC

𝜌 𝑗𝑒𝑡  (kg/m 3) 997.10  997.17 

𝜌 𝑎𝑖𝑟  (kg/m 3) 2.42  4.44 

𝜎  (N/m)  0.072  0.072 

𝜈 𝑎𝑖𝑟  (m 2/s)  7.638 × 10 -6 4.167 × 10 -6

𝜈 𝑗𝑒𝑡 ( m 2/s)  8.927 × 10 -7 8.925 × 10 -7

𝜇 𝑎𝑖𝑟  (N.s/m 2) 1.849 × 10 -5 1.851 × 10 -5

𝜇 𝑗𝑒𝑡 (N.s/m 2) 8.901 × 10 -4 8.900 × 10 -4

Temporal integration employs an implicit first -order Euler scheme with adaptive time -stepping, 

constrained by a maximum Courant number (CFL < 0.12). Spatial discretisation follows standard OpenFOAM 

practices: Gauss -linear schemes have been adopted for gradient and Laplacian terms, while bounded, second -

order upwind -biased schemes are employed for convection terms. The compressible flow solver uses a PIMPLE 

algorithm comprising one outer SIMPLE iteration, three inner PISO correctors, and one non -orthogonal correction 

step. Pressure (p_rgh) is solved with a GAMG solver (tolerance: 10⁻⁶, tightened to 10⁻⁸ for final ite ration), velocity 

with a PBiCGStab solver (tolerance: 10⁻⁶, tightened to 10⁻⁸ for final iteration), and thermodynamic/turbulence 

scalars with a smoothSolver (tolerance: 10⁻⁸). The volume fraction equation is solved using the isoAdvector 

geometric scheme with two interface corrections and three sub -cycles per time step. Each simulation runs for 10 

ms of physical time, and statistical averaging begins once steady values for trajectory and droplet -size metrics 

(SMD, D₃₂) are observed. Conve rgence is achieved when all residuals drop below specified tolerances and 

instantaneous mass imbalance remains below 10⁻⁵. 

III. DROPLET SIZE DISTRIBUTION (DSD) AND KEY PARAMETERS 

The following section outlines these key parameters, relevant terminologies, and distribution functions 

used for evaluating DSD in spray applications. DSD characterizes the range of droplet sizes within a spray and is 

typically represented by histograms or frequency distribution curves detail ing droplet count , surface area, or 

volume across different size ranges 28 . Volume -based distributions tend to skew towards larger droplets ,36 as they 

contribute more significantly to overall volume, as depicted in Fig. 2. Analyzing DSDs helps understand the 

effects of operating conditions, such as air velocity in atomizers, and aids in optimizing specific applications, from 

combustion to agricultural spraying. In spray analysis, mean diameters are essential metrics for characterizing 

droplet size distributions and influencing calculations in mass transfer, evaporation, and combustion .12 12 

Various mean diameters are used to characterize droplet size distributions, and each provide s unique 

insights into spray behavior suited for different applications. The Arithmetic Mean Diameter (D 10 ) provides the 

linear average of all droplet diameters, making it useful for basic size comparisons when droplet count is 

prioritized over mass or volume. T he Sauter Mean Diameter (D 32 or SMD) , defined as the ratio of particle volume 

to surface area, provides insights into atomization efficiency. Smaller D 32 values indicate finer droplets, 

facilitating faster evaporation and improved mixing, making it particularly valuable in evaporation and 

combustion applications. As noted by Chin and Lefebvre, 12 D32 is often considered the best indicator of spray 

fineness, especially in assessing spray performance. The expression for mean diameter s can be expressed in 

general as :

𝐷 𝑚𝑛 = [∑(𝑁 𝑖 𝐷 𝑖 𝑚 ) 

> ∑(𝑁 𝑖 𝐷 𝑖 𝑛 )

] 

> 1
> 𝑚 −𝑛

(22 )

where Di is the diameter of each d roplet in the distribution, Ni is the number of droplets of diameter Di, m and n

are the exponents that vary w ith respec t to the mean diameter taken into consideration.        

> FIG 2.(a) Frequency distri bution curve based on number and volume (b) Cumulative volume distribution depicting
> representative diameters (D 0.1, D0.5, D0.632, D0.9, D0.999 )

Different modeling approaches are employed to fit droplet size distributions in s pray atomization . Droplet 

size distribution (DSD) functions serve as an essential statistical tool for characterizing and predicting droplet 

behavior. The probability d ensity function (PDF ), often represented as a number distribution f(D) , indicates the 

likelihood of finding droplets within specific diameter ranges, providing a continuous representation o f the droplet 

size distribution. 28 In addition, volume d istributions f(D 3) illustrate the fraction of spray volume contributed by 

droplets of various sizes, which is especially relevant for applications requiring mass and volume c ontrol, such as 

fuel injection . To simplify the complexity of polydisperse sprays, representative diameters such as D10 (arithmetic 13 

mean), D30 (volume mean), and D32 (Sauter mean d iameter) are calculated from PDF moments, offering insights 

into surface area or volume -to -surface ratios t hat characterize spray behavior .36 For JICF sprays, probability 

density plots (PDP) can reveal bimodal distributions, often resulting from secondary breakup processes. The 

cumulative distribution p lot (CDP ) complements the PDP by showing the cumulative percentage of droplets by 

number/volume below a certain diameter, aiding in the analysis of droplets within target size ranges for specific 

application s. Discrete size distributions (histograms) are plotted here using round symbols at the center of each 

bin width , which are used to obtain continuous size distributions. All the additional parameters, including 

statistical measures such as the mean diameters, dispersion parameters , and distribution functions , have been 

included in the appendix for reference .

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

In this study, the droplet distribution obtained for a range of test cases is analy zed for a LJICF modeled 

using the VOF -LPT coupled framework . Table s I and II show the fluid properties and test conditions employed 

in the simulations , respectively . Further sections deal with how the cross flow and liquid jet parameters affect the 

droplet size distribution and transport downstream of jet injection. Since a coupled framework is used for the 

spray atomization simulations, which seamlessly transforms a range of Eulerian droplets into lagrangian, it is 

imperative to analy ze the resulting droplet size distribution s obtained. The calculation of droplet size 

characteristics involve s identifying the droplet size and position for each Lagrangian droplet, categorizing them 

into respective bins , and then averag ing over time to generate the mean droplet distribution plots. The calculations 

for mean droplet sizes (D 32 , D 10 , STD) and droplet size distribution have been employed by taking an average 

over time within the specific regions of the domain. 

A. DROPLET SIZE CHARACTERISTICS AND VALIDATION 

The Eulerian -Lagrangian coupled framework employed in this study was previously formulated and 

validated by Bhatia et al. 6 in terms of liquid jet penetration and mean droplet size s. In this work, an extended 

analysis is conducted, exploring a wider range of parameters to gain deeper insights , specifically into DSD and 

transport characteristics. Figure 3 presents scatter plots of D 32 and STD versus momentum flux ratio, comparing 

simulation results with experimental data for droplet characteristics from the breakup of a liquid jet in crossflow. 

A ±10% error band is shown on the CFD results due to the absence of statistical uncertainty data from the 

experiments. While the simulations generally align well with experimental data, variations in the Weber number 14 

across the scatter points make it challenging to establish a definitive trend. The isolated effects of the momentum 

flux ratio and Weber number are addressed in later sections.                 

> FIG 3.(a) Scatter plots of Sauter mean diameter (D 32 ) and (b) standard deviation (STD) against experimental data for
> different momentum flux ratio s(q) . Each data point here represents the mean droplet size obtained for individual case s
> within the 52.45D downstream of injection ,which is taken as per the experiments.
> TABLE II .Comparison of droplet size characteristics for computational and experimental cases.

Case 

No. 

Pressure 

(bar) 

Crossflow 

velocity 

(m/s) 

Jet velocity 

(m/s) 

Momentum 

flux ratio 

(q) 

Weber 

number 

(We) 

Experimental  Computational 

D32 

(μm) 

STD 

(μm) 

D32 

(μm) 

STD 

(μm) 

Error in 

D32 (%) 

1 2.1  61  9 8 71  88.8  23.9  82.64  22.54  6.94 

2 2.1  61  12  16  71  84.3  22.1  78.97  21.14  6.32 

3 2.1  61  19  41  71  78.5  19.6  76.18  20.61  2.96 

4 2.1  61  24  66  71  73.9  17.6  72.34  19.06  2.11 

5 3.8  65  14  10  150  78.8  19.8  75.65  21.24  4.00 

6 3.8  65  19  19  150  74.5  18.0  71.90  19.38  3.49 

7 3.8  41  19  48  60  79.3  20.0  74.75  19.77  5.74 

8 3.8  41  9 10  60  87.6  23.4  82.84  22.14  5.43 

9 3.8  41  24  77  60  75.2  18.1  68.96  17.42  8.30 

10  3.8  33  19  77  38  78.6  19.6  79.52  21.39  -1.17 

11  3.8  65  30  48  150  70.7  16.2  65.18  17.17  7.81 

12  3.8  65  38  77  150  66.7  14.2  65.62  18.11  1.62 

13  3.8  41  12  19  60  84.1  22.0  78.52  20.73  6.63 

14  3.8  92  19  10  298  69.5  15.6  61.39  16.67  11.67 

15  3.8  92  27  20  298  66.9  14.3  61.85  15.77  7.55 

16  3.8  92  43  49  298  65.2  13.5  60.48  18.70  7.24 

Table II shows the set of cases analy zed in this particular study , which is based on the experimental results 

of Amighi and Ashgriz .2,3 All the simulations were performed at a constant temperature of 25 ºC and under high -

pressure conditions, specifically at 2.1 and 3.8 bar , to mimic the density ratios as in actual gas turbines. The tests 15 

covered a range of momentum flux ratios (from 8 to 77) and crossflow Weber numbers (from 38 to 298). The 

number of generated droplets also varied depending on the test condit ions, ranging from 40,000 to 8,00,000, 

reflecting the extent to which the liquid jet core penetrated and broke up in each scenario . The comparison of 

droplet sizes against the experiments showed an average error of 5.6 % and 9.6 % for D 32 and STD , respectively .

Hence , the obtained data in simulations for droplet characteristics are found to be in good agreement with the 

experimental data. The D10 obtained in the simulations is found to be lower than th at in the experiments. An 

average error of 12.35% is obtained for D 10 . The observed lower D10 in the simulation is attributed to 

methodological differences between experimental and numerical droplet size calculations. Specifically, the 

simulations account for droplets undergoing breakup into substantially smaller sizes, whereas in the referenced 

experiments , very small droplets are not captured and are therefore excluded from size calculations . Conversely, 

the predicte d D32 aligns closely with experimental results, as larger droplets predominantly influence D₃₂ and are 

thus less sensitive to the presence of very small droplets. To closely replicate the experimental measurement 

approach and accuracy, our numerical analysis considered only those Lagrangian droplets converted from the 

Eulerian framework, ensuring the inclusion of droplets exhibiting relevant size characteristics as mentioned in 

section II. B, conforming to the experiments.   

> FIG 4.Windward jet trajectories for Case 6 on coarse (~1.3 M), medium (~4 M) and fine (~7 M) meshes versus experiment,
> demonstrating mesh independence.

A grid‐sensitivity test is also performed for Case 6 using three progressively refined meshes, coarse (≈1.3 M cells: 

D₃₂ = 78.75 μm, STD = 21.62 μm), medium (≈4 M cells: D₃₂ = 71.90 μm, STD = 19.38 μm) and fine (≈7 M cells: 

D₃₂ = 71.07 μm, STD = 20.08 μm) to assess mesh independence in both windward trajectories and droplet size 

metrics. As illustrated in Fig. 4, all three grids capture the jet trajectory within exp erimental uncertainty , with only 

a slight underprediction in the coarse r mesh . For the m edium and fine grids, the trajector ies coincide well until 16 

15D , and later on , only a slight deviation is observed . The minimal variation in near‐nozzle trajectories is 

attributed to the efficacy of the adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) technique , which ensures adequate resolution 

of interface dynamics even on coarser base grids. Moreover , the D₃₂ values obtained on the medium mesh deviate 

by less than 1 μm (<2 %) from those of the fine m esh, confirming convergence of the droplet size metrics. 

B. EFFECT OF CROSSFLOW AND JET PARAMETERS ON OVERALL DROPLET SIZE 

DISTRIBUTION 

The overall mean droplet size characteristics in Table II were calculated in the 52.45D downstream domain 

from the liquid jet injection point as per the experimental calculations. The number -based probability density plot 

(PDP ) for a j et -in -crossflow (LJICF) categori zes the droplet sizes produced during atomization in different size 

ranges as a fraction of the total number of droplets in the domain. The cumulative distribution plot (CDP ) based 

on the number or volume of droplets represents the proportion of total droplets (by count or volume) that are 

smaller than or equal to a given size. This helps to visualize the spread of droplet sizes within a spray and assess 

how they contribute cumulatively to the distribution. 

B.1 EFFECT OF MOMENTU M FLUX RATIO 

Figure s 5 (a) and (b) show the number based probability density plot (PDP), and Fig. 5 (c) and (d) show 

the volume based cumulative distribution plot (CDP) of droplet sizes at different liquid jet velocities and two 

different pressure conditions (2.1 bar and 3.8 bar). Figure s 5 (a) and b reveal that droplets above 100 μm are also 

present, though few in number, and contribute significantly to D 32 , as the CDP shows that 20 -40% of the 

contribution of volume is from droplets above 100 μm. This highlights that the number based PDP alone doesn’t 

capture the influence of larger droplets on D 32 and STD. Therefore, a volume -based PDP or CDP is more suitable 

for the qualitative analy sis of these distributions. 17     

> FIG 5. Effect of liquid jet velocity on (a), (b) overall droplet size distribution (PDP) and (c), (d) cumulative droplet size
> distribution (CDP). Legend values in the brackets represent (D 32 , D 10 , STD)

As the liquid jet velocity increases, the cumulative distribution curves in Fig. 5 (c) and (d) shift to the left, 

indicating smaller average droplet diameters. At 2.1 bar, increasing the jet velocity from 9 m/s to 24 m/s results 

in a steeper CDP curve that peaks at a smaller diameter. The higher liquid jet velocities result in an increa sed 

momentum flux ratio and consequently induce the Rayleigh -Taylor instability in the jet c ore to produce smaller 

droplets .7 A similar trend appears at 3.8 bar, though with a shift toward smaller droplet sizes than at 2.1 bar, 

highlighting the role of both pressure and velocity in droplet breakup. Higher pressures (3.8 bar) with large jet 

velocities (30 and 38 m/s) lead to steeper slopes at smaller diameters, indicating efficient atomization with a more 

uniform DSD, which could be advantageous for applications requiring fine sprays, such as fuel -air mixing. Thus, 

an increased momentum flux ratio enables the cumulative volume to be reached with smaller diameter droplets, 

implying a more efficient ato mization process that could enhance fuel -air mixing or similar applications in spray 18 

technology. For cases 11 and 12, the CDP exhibits similar behavior due to the high q, which causes significant jet 

penetration and top -wall impingement for larger droplets in case 12. Additionally, the R -T wavelength is closer, 

depicting similar atomization levels. While q increases from 48 (Case 11) to 77 (Case 12), the Weber number 

remains unchanged. This implies that increasing Vjet in this case does not significantly enhance the breakup 

process. 

The experimental D32 decreases slightly from 70.7 μm (Case 11) to 66.7 μm (Case 12). However, the 

computational D32 values for both cases are almost identical (65.18 μm for Case 11 and 65.62 μm for Case 12), 

indicating that computational predictions are less sensitive to the increase in jet velocity from this point. This is 

attributed to the lower cutoff (42 μm) conversion criterion used in the simulations for Eulerian -to -LPT 

transformation, which restricts the generation of very small droplets. This cutoff is defined based on the range of 

droplet sizes analyzed in the experiments .2,3 Additionally, within the LPT framework, the droplets can further 

break up into even smaller sizes. The STD values (indicative of the spread in droplet size distribution) show 

minimal change between the two cases, further supporting the similarity in atomization behavior. 

The lower standard deviation at higher velocities also suggests that higher jet velocities contribute to a 

more un iform DSD . There is also a significant increase in the production of smaller droplets at these higher 

velocities, with the peak of the PDP reflecting the most common droplet size being noticeably less at lower 

velocities. This shift occurs because the PDP shows the fraction of total droplets rather than their number density, 

as illustrated in the subsequent number density plots. Overall, this confirms a trend toward finer and more uniform 

droplet sizes with increased momentum flux. 

B.2 EFFECT OF CROSSFLOW PRESSURE AND CROSSFLOW VELOCITY 

The PDP plots ( Fig. 6 (a) and (b)) show that as crossflow pressure or velocity increases, the DSD shifts 

towards smaller diameters. This indicates that both higher pressures and velocities promote droplet breakup, 

leading to finer droplets. Cases with higher crossflow pressure or velocity exhibit peaks at smaller droplet sizes, 

demonstrating more intense atomization effects. This DSD shift reflects the resulting variations in D 32 , D 10 , and 

STD values, with smaller droplet diameters and reduced spread in droplet sizes at higher crossflow conditions. 19        

> FIG .6.Effect of crossflow pressure (a), (c) and crossflow velocity (b), (d) on overall droplet size distribution ( PDP )and
> cumulative droplet size distribution ( CDP )

The CDP plots ( Fig. 6 (c) and (d)) further highlight that increased crossflow pressure and velocity result 

in a steeper rise in cumulative volume at smaller droplet sizes, indicating that a significant portion of the volume 

is contained in smaller droplets under these conditions. Higher p ressures and velocities cause more efficient 

atomization, achieving the cumulative volume with finer droplets. The observed trend suggests that controlling 

crossflow parameters can effectively tailor the droplet size distribution for applications requiring specific droplet 

characteristics, such as enhanced mixing or controlled spray patterns. 20 

B.3 EFFECT OF CROSSFLOW WEBER NUMBER          

> FIG .7.Effect of crossflow Weber number on (a) overall droplet size distribution ( PDP )and (b) cumulative droplet size
> distribution ( CDP )

Figure 7 shows the probability plots for droplet size distribution and cumulative volume fraction for cases 

8, 5, and 14, illustrating the effect of Weber number on droplet formatio n. In the PDP plot , Case 8 (We=60) shows 

a broader distribution with a higher peak near larger diameters (~45 μm) , suggesting a less effective breakup 

compared to Cases 5 and 14, which have higher Weber numbers (We=150 and We=298 , respectively). The higher 

Weber numbers in Cases 5 and 14 promote more extensive atomization, as reflected by the tighter and higher 

peaks near smaller diameters (~35 -40 μm) , indicating a greater prevalence of smaller droplets. The shift observed 

in the distributions in Case 14 is more pronounced than in Cases 8 and 5, as clearly seen in the PDP . This is 

because of the increased Weber number , which results in enhanced breakup due to shear. The transition in breakup 

regimes from column breakup to bag, multimode , and shear with increasing Weber number leads to progressively 

finer atomization, favoring smaller droplets at higher Weber numbers. 

The cumulative volume fraction graph further elucidates these findings. Case 8, with the lowest Weber 

number, shows the slowest rise in cumulative volume fraction, indicating a distribution skewed towards larger 

droplets. In contrast, Cases 5 and 14, parti cularly Case 14 with the highest Weber number, demonstrate steeper 

curves, reaching 50% of the volume at smaller diameters, which signifies a shift towards finer droplets. This 

showcases the inverse relationship between the Weber number and droplet size, w here higher Weber numbers 

facilitate the creation of smaller droplets through more efficient atomization and breakup processes. 21 

C. DROPLET SIZE CHARACTERISTICS VARIATION IN THE STREAMWISE DIRECTION 

This section investigates the influence of liquid jet velocity (V jet ), crossflow pressure (P), and crossflow 

velocity (V air ) on droplet size characteristics and their variation downstream . The effects of these crossflow and 

liquid jet parameters are analy zed, both individually and also through non -dimensional parameters , namely 

momentum flux ratio (q) and Weber number (We) . Subsequent sections delve into the specific impacts of liquid 

jet velocity, crossflow velocity, and a mbient pressure on droplet size distribution using PDP and CDP 

distribution s.    

> FIG 8.Downstream planes used for the extraction of droplet statistics and size distribution.

Droplet size characteristics were also calculated at downstream lo cations (X = 5D, 10D, 15D.... 50D) using 

2.5D thick sub -domain planes , as shown in Fig. 8, to understand the variation of droplet characteristics in the 

downstream . Droplets crossing the downstream plane s were recorded and averaged over time to determine mean 

droplet size characteristics and distribution. 

C.1 EFFECT OF MOMENTU M FLUX RATIO 

Figure 9 presents the influence of momentum flux ratio/ liquid jet velocity (V jet ) on droplet size 

characteristics variation downstream , specifically the D 32 and the STD of droplets . Across all cases, D 32 increases 

up to around 30D downstream and then stabilizes or decreases slightly , reflecting droplet growth and dispersion, 

as observed from the downstream variation plots . A similar trend has also been observed in Johny et al. 25 . The 

variation in D 32 for lower liquid jet velocity cases exhibits a distinct peak and subsequent drop, which can be 

explained as follows. An initial increase in D 32 is observed in the near -nozzle region, followed by a slight decrease 

for lower jet velocity cases, as compared to the higher jet velocity cases that show a steady variation downstream. 

The initial rise in D 32 is attributed to the transformation of larger Eulerian droplets into Lagrangian particles, 22 

leading to an increase in the volume -to -surface area ratio. In the region close to the nozzle (5 –10D), the droplet 

population predominantly consists of smaller Eulerian droplets sheared from the edges of the liquid jet core in all 

cases . Moving further downstream, at around 10D, the central liquid jet core begins to disintegrate into larger 

lumps and ligaments of liquid , depen ding on the type of instability on the liquid jet surface .7 These unstable 

structures break into large droplets between 10D and 20 –25D, introducing larger droplets into the Lagrangian 

system after the conversion 7, as observed from case 1 in Fig. 9 (a) and case 5 in Fig. 9 (c). For very low jet velocity 

cases, the shearing process at the jet -core edges is far less than that of higher velocity cases. Therefore, more 

liquid remains as part of the liquid jet core, which undergoes disintegration to produce larger liquid lumps. In 

other words, a larger amount of liquid in the jet core leads to droplet formation through shearing , in contrast to 

instability -based central core disintegration. Since these large liquid lumps of low velocity cases are more prone 

to secondary atomization than the smaller, stable droplets generated from high -velocity cases, the overall droplet 

size shows a gradual decline in these regions (35D -45D) of low liquid jet velocity cases. 

Case 1 (lowest jet velocity) exhibits the highest D 32 , indicating larger droplets, while Case 4 (highest jet 

velocity) shows the smallest D 32 , reflecting finer droplets due to enhanced atomization at higher jet velocities. A

similar trend is seen with STD, where Case 1 exhibits the highest STD, meaning greater size variation in droplets ,

and Case 4 has the lowest STD, showing more uniform droplet sizes. The decrease in both D 32 and STD with 

increasing jet velocity is due to enhanced atomization, driven by a higher momentum flux ratio, as jet velocity 

increases from 9 m/s to 24 m/s. This results in smaller, more uniform droplets. The obser ved decline in D₃₂ beyond 

30 D , even as some droplets > 10 0 μm persist at 45 D (Fig. 10c) , stems from competing droplet dynamics. Initially 

(10 –25 D), core breakup generates large ligaments that convert into bigger droplets, raising D₃₂. Beyond 30 D, 

these large droplets undergo delayed secondary atomization under aerodynamic shear, reducing the mean size, 

while a small fraction with sufficient inertia survives, accounting for the heavy -end tail at 45 D. Lower jet 

velocities exacerbate this effect by producing fewer small shear -stripped droplets and more jet core derived lumps 

that break up downstream. 

As the liquid jet velocity increases (Cases 1 -4 and Cases 5,6,11), the D 32 decreases, indicating that higher 

velocities lead to smaller droplet sizes. This is likely due to stronger atomization forces breaking up the liquid jet 

more effectively at higher velocities. The larger droplets in Case 1 and Case 5 suggest weaker atomization at 

lower velocities. Higher liquid jet velocities result in a narrower droplet size distribution (lower STD). This 

indicates that higher velocities not only produce smaller droplets but also more uniform droplet sizes. The broad 23 

distribution of Case 1 ( Fig. 9 (a) and (b)) and Case 5 ( Fig. 9 (c) and (d)) with lower jet velocities suggest s less 

efficient breakup, leading to a wider range of droplet sizes.           

> (a) (b)
> (c) (d)
> FIG 9.Effect of liquid jet velocity on droplet size characteristics in the downstream at (a) , (b) 2.1bar and ( c), (d) 3.8bar

At 3.8 bar (Fig. 9 (c) and (d)) , the impact of increasing liquid jet velocity on D 32 and STD remains 

consistent with the 2.1 bar case ( Fig. 9 (a) and (b) ): higher velocities result in smaller, more uniform droplets. In 

Case 11, the absence of a distinct peak and drop trend and the higher D 32 at 10D compared to Cases 5 and 6 are 

attributed to the combined effects of high pressure and jet momentum , enabling faster atomization near the nozzle. 

Minimal CDP variation at 15D, 30D, and 45D ( Fig. 11 (d)) confirms that atomization is nearly complete by 15D ,

with most droplets forming between 10D and 15D. This suggests that the majority of the droplets are formed 

between 10D and 15D from the injection point, resulting in steady D 32 values further downstream. The 24 

combination of high pressure and jet momentum , as in Case 11 , produces the smallest D 32 and STD, driven by 

stronger shear forces that break the jet into finer, more consistent droplets.          

> (a) (b)
> (c) (d)
> FIG 10 .Droplet size distribution in the downstream: (a) Case 1 -PDP (b) Case 4 -PDP (c) Case 1-CDP (d) Case 4 -CDP

Two key factors contribute to the reduction in droplet size. Firstly, a rising jet velocity increases the jet's 

Reynolds number, leading to higher instability ,30,39 promoting more extensive droplet break -up. Secondly, higher 

jet velocity enhances penetration depth into the cross -flow, resulting in increased exposure of the liquid jet to the 

crossflow air. Thus, the increased shear force exposure between the liquid jet and crossflow air leads to finer and 

more uniform atomization. Thus, a higher atomization efficiency is observed at high liquid jet velocities . The 

combined effect of these factors is a decrease in both D 32 and STD values. The plot at 3.8 bar reinforces the trend 

that higher jet velocity and higher pressure both contribute to better atomization, resulting in smaller and uniform 25 

droplets. In conclusion, Fig s 9 (a), (b), (c), and (d) together demonstrate that increasing both pressure and jet 

velocity can significantly improve atomization efficiency in spray processes. 

Fig ure 11 presents the PDPs and CDPs at a slightly higher pressure of 3.8bar for c ases 6 and 11 in the 

downstream locations of 15D, 30D, and 45D. Some g eneral observations across these downstream planes are 

discussed here. The peak probability for smaller droplet diameters decreases as the spray evolves from 15D to 

45D . This trend reflects the breakup of larger droplets into smaller ones and the progressive redistribution of 

droplet sizes downstream. The cases exhibit a broader tail for droplet sizes beyond 100 μm , indicating that while 

many smaller droplets are formed, some large droplets persist in the downstream regions. However, the 

distributions become smoother with distance, especially by 45D , suggesting secondary breakup events stabilize 

over time. The inset plot with a zoomed section highlights the small probability values for larger droplets (above 

100 μm) . Even at longer distances, some large droplets survive, albeit with diminishing probability . In order to 

understand the contribution of larger droplets towards droplet size characteristics, the droplet PDP alone is not 

sufficient. A CDP based on droplet volume is therefore additionally analyzed for these cases. 

For Case 1, a n arrower distribution at smaller diameters (e.g., ~40 μm) for all planes is observed. The shift 

in peak probability from 15D to 45D suggests a gradual breakup due to lower jet velocity and ambient crossflow 

air speed. Droplet sizes are generally more tightly distributed with less secondary atomization , as indicated by the 

more defined single peak around 40 -50 μm. In Case 1, stabilization occurs around ~45D, with fewer droplets and 

larger droplet sizes, and the distribution is broader, suggesting incomplete breakup/partial atomization. For Case 

4, a b roader distribution with a more pronounced bimodal shape (two peaks), especially for 15D and 30D. The 

first peak around 30 -40 μm reflects smaller droplets formed early in the breakup process. A second peak at 75 -

100 μm suggests incomplete secondary atomization . Higher jet velocity leads to more energetic atomization, 

producing a wider range of droplet sizes. In Case 4, droplet sizes stabilize around 30D –35D, indicating that most 

of the breakup has already occurred by then. Case 11 (V jet = 30 m/s) achieves better atomization and stabilization 

with smaller, more uniform droplets across the downstream distances compared to Case 6 (V jet = 19 m/s). Both 

cases show peaks at 45 –50 μm, but Case 6 has more variability and persistence of larger droplets, whereas Case 

11 achieves tighter size control. 26        

> (a )(b )
> (c) (d)
> FIG 11 .Droplet size distribution in the downstream: (a) Case 6 -PDP (b) Case 11 -PDP (c) Case 6 -CDP (d) Case 11 -CDP

Higher liquid jet velocity (as in Case s 4 and 11 ) is preferable for applications requiring finer spray 

distribution and efficient mixing due to the higher droplet count and smaller average size. Lower liquid jet 

velocities (Case s 1 and 6) might be better for coarser spray applications where moderate droplet sizes and less 

evaporation are desired. These results highlight the importance of jet velocity and breakup dynamics in controlling 

droplet size distributions and downstream behavio r in such atomization processes. 

C.2 EFFECT OF PRESSURE 

Figure 12 shows the effect of ambient pressure on the SMD and STD at constant liquid jet (19m/s) and 

crossflow velocities (61 & 65 m/s). Increasing crossflow pressure (2.1 bar to 3.8 bar) reduced the momentum flux 

ratio (q) (from 41 to 19) , decreasing jet penetration, while the crossflow Weber number increases (from 71 to 27 

150 ). Increasing ambient pressure increases the crossflow air density and drag force, promoting the breakup of 

larger droplets into smaller ones , which reduces the overall SMD . Since the SMD calculation is more sensitive to 

the presence of larger droplets, their reduction consequently lowers the SMD. A similar trend is observed in the 

STD , indicating that higher pressure promotes a more uniform droplet size distribution through enhanced 

atomization. However, it's important to note that the increased drag forces associated with higher pressure also 

lead to a reduction in the liquid jet penetration.     

> (a) (b)
> FIG 12 .Effect of crossflow pressure on droplet size characteristics i n the downstream : (a) D32, (b) STD

As discussed above, high crossflow pressure (Case 6) increases aerodynamic forces, enhancing primary 

breakup and producing smaller droplets. This is evident from the reduced breakup location, decreasing from 

Xbreakup =9.64D in Case 3 to X breakup =8.67D in Case 6. Lower crossflow pressure (Case 3) results in incomplete 

atomization, with larger droplets surviving further downstream due to weaker aerodynamic and shear forces. 

Higher pressure promotes the formation of smaller, stable droplets but reduces the overall droplet count. Case 3 

shows greater penetration and broa der spread, leading to more droplets in specific crossflow planes than Case 6. 

Additionally, the average droplet residence time in the domain i s longer in Case 3 than in Case 6. 28           

> (a) (b)
> (c) (d)
> FIG 13 .Droplet size distribution in the d ownstream: (a) Case 3-2.1bar ( PDP )(b) Case 6 -3.8bar ( PDP )(c) Case 3 -2.1bar
> (CDP )(d) Case 6 -3.8bar ( CDP )

In Fig. 13 , the droplet size distributions for Case 3 (P = 2.1 bar) and Case 6 (P = 3.8 bar) at downstream 

distances of 15D, 30D, and 45D reveal distinct patterns influenced by crossflow pressure. In both cases, the 

primary peak occurs around 45 –50 μm, but Case 6 shows sharper peaks with fewer large droplets, indicating more 

efficient atomization. The broader distribution in Case 3, with a secondary peak near 25 μm and a more prominent 

tail beyond 100 μm, suggests incomplete breakup and higher droplet variability. As dr oplets move downstream, 

both cases exhibit stabilization in their size distribution, but Case 6 maintains smaller droplets and tighter size 

control across all locations. This is reflected in the lower SMD and standard deviation values for Case 6, which 

are driven by stronger aerodynamic breakups due to higher ambient pressure. Case 6 is more suitable for high -

performance spray systems like fuel injection, where smaller and more consistent droplet sizes are desired. Case 

3 may be better suited for applications requiring larger droplets, such as agricultural spraying or fire suppr ession 29 

under ambient condit ions, where variability in size can enhance coverage and droplet penetration. These results 

emphasize the importance of crossflow pressure in achieving the desired droplet size distribution and variability 

co ntrol in atomization processes. 

C.3 EFFECT OF CROSS FLOW VELOCITY 

Figure 14 illustrate s the influence of crossflow velocity on droplet size characteristics across various 

downstream locations. As expected, the results demonstrate a decrease in droplet size with increasing crossflow 

velocity. Th e interplay between aerodynamic drag and the momentum of the liquid jet can explain this trend . At 

lower crossflow velocities, the air exerts a weaker drag on the liquid jet, resulting in a higher momentum flux ratio 

(liquid momentum as compared to air momentum) and , hence , the deeper jet penetration. This deeper penetration 

leads to a broa der spray plume but reduced atomization as larger droplets persist due to weaker shear forces. 

Consequently, the breakup is less effective, resulting in larger droplet sizes at lower crossflow velocities .

In contrast, at higher crossflow velocities, the drag force from the air increases significantly, bending and 

flattening the liquid jet into a flattened, sheet -like structure at the windward side. This reduced penetration flattens 

the trajectory of the li quid jet further, intensifying the effects of shear -driven K -H instabilities. This deformation 

corresponds to an increased air Weber number (We>110) and low momentum flux ratio , marking the dominance 

of aerodynamic shear over other forces and promoting a shift toward a "pure shear" breakup mode. The flattening 

jet triggers K -H instabilities at the liquid -air interface , which arise due to the velocity shear at the liquid -air 

interface. These instabilities amplify as surface waves on the jet’s core grow in intensity, breaking the jet into 

ligaments and smaller droplets. The increased deformation leads to an earlier onset of primary breakup, 

transitioning the instability regime from Rayleigh -Taylor to Kelvin -Helmholtz instabilities as t he crossflow 

velocity increases .7 This stronger shear promotes extensive breakup and atomization into smaller droplets, 

reducing the overall D 32 and STD. In this mode, larger droplets disintegrate into smaller ones, further decreasing 

D32 and leading to a finer and more uniform droplet size distribution. 30    

> (a) (b)
> FIG 14 .Effect of crossflow velocity on droplet size ch aracteristics in the downstream : (a) D 32 , (b) STD

As the crossflow velocity increases from 41m/s to 92m/s , the variation in D32 changes from linear to a 

flattened bell curve. Higher crossflow velocities , as in Case 14 , result in smaller droplet sizes across all 

downstream distances. At a higher crossflow velocity of 92m/s, D32 stabilizes to around 60 μm beyond 35 D, 

implying an effective atomization being attained . Lower crossflow velocities (Case 7) produce larger droplets, 

with D 32 exceeding 79 μm at 50D, indicating incomplete breakup and droplet coalescence downstream. 

Intermediate velocity (Case 6) leads to a moderate D 32 (72 –74 μm), reflecting a balanced breakup process. Higher 

crossflow velocities (Case 14) exhibit the smallest variability, with STD decreasing to 15 μm around 45 D. This 

reflects a more uniform droplet size distribution due to stronger aerodynamic shear forces. This promotes a stable 

atomization with minimal coalescence or growth downstream. Lower crossflow velocities (Case 7) result in 

weaker aerodynamic forces, allowing larger droplets to p ersist and coalesce, increasing size variability. This 

resu lt s in increased size variability (STD ~21 μm) , and larger droplets surviving downstream indicate incomplete 

atomization. Case 6, with intermediate crossflow velocity, reflects a balanced atomization process, producing 

moderate droplet sizes and variability. 31      

> (a) (b)
> (c )(d )
> FIG 15 .Droplet size distribution in the do wnstream: (a) Case 7: V air =41m/s ( PDP ) (b) Case 14: V air =92m/s ( PDP ) (c) Case
> 7: V air =41m/s ( CDP ) (d) Case 14: V air =92m/s ( CDP )

The downstream droplet size distributions for Case 7 ( Vair = 41 m/s) and Case 14 ( Vair = 92 m/s) in Fig. 15 

show the effect of cr ossflow velocity on atomization in the downstream. In Case 7 , a noticeable peak of around 

45 μm is presen t across all downstream planes , and with a secondary small peak near 25 μm in the 15D and 30D 

planes . This indicates an incomplete breakup, allowing larger droplets to persist. In t he downstream e volution of 

droplet sizes , D32 increases from 68.64 μm at 15D to 79.34 μm at 45D , and this can occur due to two factors: One 

from the conversion of droplets from Eulerian to lagrangian (droplet generation) and another due to droplet 

coalesce in the downstream (droplet growth) . This is consistent with the lower crossflow velocity, where weaker 

aerodynamic forces allow droplet growth and size variability. The distribution becomes broader downstream, as 

indicated by the increasing D 32 and STD , suggesting a less uniform size distribution with larger droplet sizes. 32 

Thus , lower crossflow velocity , as in Case 7 , leads to less efficient breakup, resulting in larger droplets and a 

broader size distribution downstream. 

Higher crossflow velocity , as in Case 14 , results in finer, uniform droplets with a consistent peak of around 

40 μm across the downstream planes, indicating more efficient atomization and a tighter droplet size distribution. 

D32 stabilizes to around 60 μm , demonstrating that higher crossflow velocity (92 m/s) effectively limits droplet 

growth and coalescence . Droplets remain smaller and more uniform even at longer distances (45D). The 

distribution is narrower compared to Case 7, with fewer larger droplets present, reflecting enhanced breakup and 

better size control due to t he stronger aerodynamic forces. These results suggest that higher crossflow velocities 

are ideal for applications requiring finer, more consistent droplet sizes . In comparison, lower velocities are suited 

for scenarios where larger droplets and broade r distributions are acceptable. 

C.4 EFFECT OF CROSSFLOW WEBER NUMBER 

The Weber number (We) represents the ratio of inertial forces to surface tension forces in the flow, and it 

plays a crucial role in droplet breakup. By keeping the momentum flux ratio constant (by adjusting both crossflow 

and liquid jet velocities proporti onally), the results isolate the sole effect of the Weber number on droplet size 

characteristics.    

> (a) (b)
> FIG 16 .Effect of crossflow Weber number on droplet size characteristics in the downstream : (a) D32, (b) STD

33      

> (a) (b)
> (c)
> FIG 17 .Droplet size distribution in the downstream: (a) Case8 : We=60 (b) Case 5 : We=150 (c) Case 14 : We=298

Higher Weber numbers (Case 14, We = 298) result in smaller droplets, with D 32 stabilizing around 60 μm 

beyond 30D, indicating that stronger inertial forces dominate surface tension, enhancing atomization and 

promoting a uniform droplet size distribution with lower STD (~15 μm at 45D). In contrast, lower Weber numbers 

(Case 8, We = 60) show larger droplets (~80 μm) persisting downstream with higher STD (~25 μm at 45D), 

reflecting weaker breakup and greater size variability. Case 5 (We = 150) exhibits intermediate behavior, with 

D32 around 70 μm and moderate STD (~20 μm), balancing atomization efficiency and droplet variability. Across 

all cases, increasing the Weber number enhances breakup, reducing droplet size and variability, as higher inertial 

forces overcome surface tension, re sulting in finer, more consistent droplets. Similar aspects are already explained 

in the previous section. 34 

D. MEAN DROPLET SIZES AND DISPERSION CHARACTERISTICS 

Table III. presents the statistical parameters of droplet size distributions across varying operating 

conditions in Liquid Jet in Crossflow (LJICF) systems. The cases span a range of momentum flux ratios (q), 

Weber numbers (We), and associated parameters to illustrate their effects on droplet characteristics. Mean droplet 

diameters (D 10 , D20 , D30 , D 21 , D 32 ) and representative diameters indicate finer droplets at higher q and We. 

Cumulative volume -based diameters (D 0.1 , D0.5 , D0.632 , D0.9 , D0.999 ) demonstrate shifts in droplet size distribution, 

emphasizing reduced dispersion (STD) at higher momentum flux ratios. Dispersion parameters, including the 

droplet uniformity index (DUI) and the MMD/SMD ratio, further quantify the effects of q and We. Typically , in 

the literature 2,3 , the reported MMD/SMD ratio is 1.2 , while in our simulations , the value s observed are slightly 

above 1. The lower MMD/SMD ratio observed in the simulations compared to the typical 1.2 reported in literature 

likely stems from differences in atomization modeling, initial conditions, or numerical resolution, leading to 

narrower droplet size distributions. High Weber number cases (e.g., Cases 11, 12 , 15, 16) exhibit lower DUI and 

MMD/SMD values, signifying more uniform droplet siz es with tighter distributions. 

TABLE III. Statistical parameters for droplet size distribution at different operating conditions 

Case 

No. 

q We 

Mean diameters  Representative diameter  Dispersion parameters 

D10 

(μm) 

D20 

(μm) 

D30 

(μm) 

D21 

(μm) 

D32 

(μm) 

D0.1 

(μm) 

D0.5 

(μm) 

D0.632 

(μm) 

D0.9 

(μm) 

D0.999 

(μm) 

STD 

(μm) 

MMD 

/SMD 

DUI sB

# 

1 8 71  58.67  62.85  68.85  67.33  82.64  48.37  84.75  121.86  189.1  266.7  22.54  1.026  0.568  1.76  2.28 

2 16  71  57.88  61.62  66.93  65.61  78.97  47.53  78.96  105.68  175.2  265.3  21.14  1.000  0.552  1.72  2.51 

3 41  71  57.48  61.07  65.74  64.88  76.18  47.68  77.31  89.42  164.2  260.9  20.61  1.015  0.474  1.61  2.52 

4 66  71  57.52  60.60  64.28  63.84  72.34  47.55  74.37  84.24  136.3  255.0  19.06  1.028  0.377  1.28  2.60 

5 10  150  53.15  57.24  62.81  61.64  75.65  45.52  76.95  107.40  172.7  260.9  21.24  1.017  0.560  1.76  2.58 

6 19  150  54.98  58.30  62.52  61.82  71.90  46.13  73.65  84.96  154.5  257.9  19.38  1.024  0.452  1.57  2.68 

7 48  60  56.46  59.82  64.43  63.38  74.75  47.15  75.42  87.84  170.9  263.3  19.77  1.009  0.513  1.75  2.67 

8 10  60  58.08  62.16  68.40  66.52  82.84  48.20  81.95  130.50  199.0  268.0  22.14  0.989  0.645  1.94  2.38 

9 77  60  55.78  58.44  61.76  61.23  68.96  46.38  70.24  78.82  135.4  258.2  17.42  1.018  0.390  1.36  2.86 

10  77  38  60.14  63.83  68.68  67.75  79.52  48.91  81.74  96.08  167.4  267.7  21.39  1.028  0.461  1.54  2.41 

11  48  150  53.84  56.51  59.27  59.32  65.18  45.71  68.33  75.32  100.3  225.1  17.17  1.048  0.291  0.86  2.48 

12  77  150  53.00  56.01  59.05  59.20  65.62  45.63  68.65  75.94  106.0  222.3  18.11  1.046  0.308  0.95  2.43 

13  19  60  57.98  61.58  66.77  65.39  78.52  47.48  79.37  97.49  181.0  269.0  20.73  1.011  0.551  1.79  2.53 

14  10  298  46.24  49.19  52.95  52.31  61.39  41.96  59.75  71.72  141.8  236.1  16.67  0.973  0.509  1.83  3.23 

15  20  298  51.83  54.17  56.61  56.62  61.85  44.52  63.58  70.71  93.2  216.3  15.77  1.028  0.302  0.84  2.61 

16  49  298  46.99  50.48  53.61  54.38  60.48  44.14  63.04  69.37  91.1  201.1  18.70  1.042  0.281  0.82  2.37 35   

> FIG 18 .Maximum droplet sizes variation with (a) Momentum flux ratio (b) Crossflow pressure (c) Crossflow velocity (d)
> Crossflow Weber number

At low Weber numbers ( We=60 and We=7 1), the variation in D0.999 with increasing momentum flux ratio 

(q) is minimal. However, at higher Weber numbers ( We=150 and We=29 8), the variation in D0.999 becomes more 

pronounced , as observed in Fig. 18 (a). At low Weber numbers , the aerodynamic forces acting on the liquid jet 

are relatively weaker than surface tension forces. Consequently, D 0.999 does not vary significantly with q, as the 

breakup mechanism is dominated by inertial and surface tension effects rather than aerodynamic forces. At high 

Weber n umbers , the aerodynamic forces become much stronger relative to surface tension forces, enhancing the 

atomization process. Under these conditions, the variation in q significantly influences the breakup process, 

leading to a noticeable reduction in D 0.999 as q increases. This is because the aerodynamic forces at high We ber 

numbers are more effective in fragmenting the larger droplets, which D0.999 represents . Thus , the variation in 

maximum droplet diameter (D0.999 ) is highly dependent on Weber number , with significant variation occurring 36 

only at higher Weber numbers . Hence , it is observed that the variation in D 0.999 is less sensitive to the changes in 

q at lower Weber numbers. The narrowing gap between D0.9 and D0.999 with increasing q and We suggests that 

high -energy conditions promote uniform atomization and suppress the formation of outlier droplets. 

As observed from Fig. 18 (b), the maximum droplet size ( D0.999 ) is relatively insensitive to crossflow 

pressure changes within the range studied (2.1 bar to 3.8 bar). Higher crossflow pressure enhances droplet breakup 

for the majority of the droplet population, resulting in a smaller D 0.9 . This indicates that crossflow pressure has a 

more pronounced effect on the intermediate and smaller droplets than on the largest droplets. 

Figure 18 (c) demonstrates the effect of crossflow velocity ( Vair ) on D0.99 9 (maximum droplet diameter) 

and D0.9 (droplet diameter encompassing 90% of the total droplet volume) across four cases with varying 

crossflow velocities. As crossflow velocity increases from 33 m/s (Case 10) to 92 m/s (Case 14), D0.999 shows a 

gradual decrease. The decrease is more pronounced at higher velocities (from Case 6 to Case 14), indicating 

stronger aerodynamic effects at higher crossflow velocity . D 0.9 consistently decreases with increasing crossflow 

velocity, showing a similar reduction as compared to D0.999 . The trend highlights a progressive reduction in the 

size of the majority of the droplets as the crossflow velocity increases. Larger droplets (represented by D0.999 are 

less affected by aerodynamic forces at lower crossflow velocities because of their high inertia. However, as the 

crossflow velocity increases, the relative velocity difference between the jet and the crossflow grows, leading to 

enhanced shear forces a nd partial breakup of these large droplets. The observed sharp decrease in D0.9 and D 0.999 

highlights the dominant role of crossflow velocity in influencing the size of the bulk droplet population. 

Figure 18 (d) shows the effect of crossflow Weber number ( We=ρ air Vair 2Djet /σ) on D0.999 (maximum droplet 

diameter) and D0.9 (droplet diameter encompassing 90% of the droplet volume) for different momentum flux ratios 

(q) . While crossflow velocity and Weber number effects show similar outcomes, the Weber number consolidates 

the combined effects of crossflow velocity, fluid density, and surface tension into a single parameter. This makes 

it universally applicable for comparing atomization behavior across different fluids and operating conditions. 

D0.999 decreases with increasing Weber number for all values of q. The rate of decrease is more significant at 

higher Weber numbers, indicating enhanced droplet breakup in regimes dominated by higher aerodynamic forces. 

Higher Weber numbers correspond to stronger aerodynamic forces (via the term ρair Vair 2), which enhance the 

breakup of droplets and lead to smaller D0.999 and D0.9 . At higher Weber numbers, the breakup mechanism 

transitions to a more vigorous regime, leading to smaller maximum droplet sizes. D0.9 follows a similar decreasing 

trend as D0.999 , but the reduction is more pronounced, especially at lower Weber numbers. 37    

> FIG 19 .Downstream variat ion in maximum droplet sizes with (a) crossflow velocity and (b) c rossflow Weber number and
> momentum flux ratio

Figure 19 illustrates the downstream variation of D0.999 for different crossflow velocities, Weber numbers ,

and momentum flux ratios , highlighting the significant influence of crossflow velocity and Weber number on the 

atomization process. For Cases 8 and 13 ( We=60 ), increasing q from 10 to 19 results in larger droplets (as a 

consequence of higher mass flow rate for q=19) in the 10 –20D range, while the variation becomes similar beyond 

20D. This supports the observation that D0.999 is less sensitive to changes in q at lower Weber numbers, where 

aerodynamic forces are weaker. However, at higher Weber numbers ( We=150, 298 ), D0.999 shows a more 

pronounced variation with q, reflecting the dominance of aerodynamic forces over surface tension. The narrowing 

gap between larger droplets ( D0.999 ) and the bulk population ( D0.9 ) at higher energy conditions indicates a transition 

to a more uniform atomization regime. These results underline the importance of operating at higher Weber 

numbers and crossflow velocities to achieve efficient atomization and reduce the occurrence of la rger, outlier 

droplets in crossflow spray systems. 

D.1 EFFECT OF VARIOUS PARAMETERS ON NUMBER DENSITY OF DROPLETS 

This section explores the variations in the number density of droplets along the downstream distance with 

liquid jet and crossflow parameters. Higher velocities and pressures generally promote finer atomization and a 

larger number of smaller droplets, while lower velocities and pressures may lead to larger droplets and potentially 

fewer in number. The momentum flux ratio, which measures the relative strength of the jet to the crossflow, plays 

a critical role in droplet number density. A higher momentum flux ratio correlates with deeper jet penetration into 

the crossflow, expanding the spray plume an d resulting in a greater number of droplets. Droplet residence time 

also influences the number of droplets observed. A longer residence time allows droplets to remain in the domain 38 

for a more extended period, contributing to the total droplet count. Conversely, shorter residence times may reduce 

the measured number of droplets due to faster dispersion and removal from the spray zone. Understanding these 

relationships is crucial for optimizing atomization processes to achieve desired droplet characteristics tailored to 

specific applications in industries such as aerospace, automotive , power generation , and more.       

> FIG 20 .Variation in number density of droplets with downstream : (a) Effect of liquid jet velocity /momentum flux ratio (b )
> Effect of crossflow pressure (c ) Effect of crossflow velocity (d) Effect of crossflow Weber number

Figure 20 (a) illustrates the effect of the liquid jet velocity/momentum flux ratio on the number density of 

droplets downstream. Higher jet velocities (e.g., Case 4: Vjet = 24 m/s) increase the momentum flux ratio (q), 

enabling deeper jet penetration and a broader spray plume. The increased mass flow rate at higher velocities 

contributes to a greater number of droplets per unit volume downstream. In contrast, lower jet velocities (Case 1: 39 

Vjet = 9 m/s) generate fewer droplets due to limited penetration and lesser mass flow rate, resulting in reduced 

interaction with the crossflow air , resulting in weaker breakup. Figure 20 (b) shows that higher crossflow pressure 

promotes finer droplets but reduces droplet number density in the 50D downstream region. This reduction can be 

attributed to the more confined spray plume caused by decreased jet penetration. Additionally, the increased 

aerodynamic drag at higher pressures deforms Eulerian droplets, potentially delaying their conversion to 

Lagrangian particles due to the co nversion criteria (sphericity and minimum diameter). 

Figure 21 shows that Case 6 retains more liquid mass in the Eulerian form compared to Case 3, with more 

elongated ligaments observed at higher pressure. This difference arises from the instability mechanisms: Case 3 

exhibits Rayleigh -Taylor (R -T) instability, leadi ng to quicker atomization, while Case 6 exhibits Kelvin -

Helmholtz (K -H) instability with longer wavelengths, resulting in delayed atomization. At higher pressures, the 

average droplet velocity increases, accelerating their downstream transport. Consequently, the droplets spend less 

time within the domain, leading to a reduction in droplet residence time. These combined effects of confined 

plume, delayed particle conversion, and reduced residence time explain the observed decrease in droplet density 

at higher crossflow pressures.           

> FIG 21 .Eulerian liquid distribution show shighlighting ligaments and elongated droplets for Case 6 (P=3.8bar) and C ase 3
> (P=2.1bar) . Higher number density in Case 6 indicates delayed particle conversion (Eulerian to Lagrangian) at increased
> pressure .

Fig ure 20 (c) shows that increasing crossflow velocity (Case 14: Vair = 92 m/s) intensifies aerodynamic 

forces, decreasing the momentum flux ratio ( q= ρ jet Vjet 2/ρ air Vair 2) of the m but enhancing atomization and 

generating more droplets with a smaller size. Lower crossflow velocities (Case 7: Vair = 41 m/s) lead to fewer 

droplets due to weaker breakup and reduced drag. However, as the crossflow velocity increases, the residence 40 

time of the droplet in the domain decreases. This , in turn , results in a low er droplet density in the downstream 

planes. 

Weber number quantifies the relative influence of inertia and surface tension forces, determining the 

breakup regime and fragmentation behavior independent of velocity alone. However, a clear dependence on the 

Weber number is not observed i n the droplet density in the downstream planes. Figure 20 (d) shows that h igh 

Weber numbers (We = 298, Case 14) result in more efficient atomization, with the generation of a large number 

of smaller droplets. Though the droplet residence time decreases with an increase in Weber number (from the 

increased crossflow velocity) , the generation of more number of smaller droplets and the increased mass flow rate 

of the liquid jet (Case 8: V jet =9m/s, Case 5: V jet =14m/s, Case 14: V jet =19m/s ) are the observed causes for the small 

difference in the number of droplets. 

In summary, higher jet velocities enhance penetration and spread, increasing droplet generation, while 

greater crossflow velocity and crossflow pressures promote finer breakup and droplet formation. The interplay 

between momentum flux ratio, spray plume size, and residence time governs droplet density along the downstream 

distance. Achieving optimal atomization and droplet distribution requires balancing jet velocity with crossflow 

parameters, as both fluid dynamics and jet -crossflow interactions play a crucial role in droplet formation. 

E. DROPLET SIZE DISTRIBUTION FUNCTIONS 

The simulated droplet -size spectra for Cases 6 and 11 ( Fig. 22a –d) have been fitted using Normal, Log -Normal, 

Rosin –Rammler (RR) , and Modified Rosin –Rammler (MRR) distributions. As shown qualitatively in Fig. 22, the 

Log -Normal curve more faithfully reproduces the skewed tails of the distribution than the symmetric Normal 

model, while RR and MRR capture the cumulative volume trends over the full size range. To provide a 

quantitati ve comparison, we have evaluated the coefficient of determination ( R² ) and the root -mean -square error 

(RMSE) for all four fits across Cases 1 –16 ( Table IV ). 

The results presented in Fig. 22 (a) and (b) indicate the effectiveness of these distributions in capturing the 

underlying droplet size trends. However, the Normal distribution captures the central tendency of the drop size 

data well. However, it tends to overpredict the probability density for intermediate droplet diameters (50 -100μm) 

and underpredicts at the tails. This behavior is expected due to the symmetric nature of the Normal distribution, 

which does not account for the skewness observed in many spray atomization datasets. Across Cases 1 –15 , the 

log -normal distribution consistently outperforms the normal fit, exhibiting higher R² (0.737 –0.867 vs. 0.496 –41 

0.734) and lower RMSE (0.0146 –0.0231 vs. 0.0242 –0.0319). This indicates that the droplet -size spectra in these 

conditions are inherently skewed, with a pronounced tail of small droplets that the log -normal model captures 

more accurately , indicating its suitability for extrapolating droplet sizes outside the measured range . The Log -

Normal distribution provides a satisfactory fit to the measured data, allows extrapolation to larger droplet sizes, 

and aligns with the general characteristics of atomization, where smaller droplets dominate. It accurately captures 

the distributio n's skewness and tail behavior and emphasizes the smaller droplet population while fitting 

intermediate sizes effectively. However, the sharp peak obtained in the simulation is not captured adequately. This 

sharp peak is partly the result of the CCL droplet conversion criteria employed in the simulation. Case 16 is the 

lone exception: here , the normal fit yields a superior R² (0.734 vs. 0.666) and lower RMSE (0.0191 vs. 0.0214), 

suggesting a more symmetric size distribution under those particular momentum -flux and Weber -number 

conditions. Overall, the log -normal form is the prefer red general model for our LJICF spray data, with the 

possibility that certain high -q, high -We cases revert to near -Gaussian behaviour and may warrant a normal fit.                                                                                                                                     

> TABLE IV. Goodness of fit metrics (RMSE and R²) for Normal, Log -normal, RR, Modified RR droplet size
> distribution fits (Cases 1 –16).
> Case Normal
> R²
> Normal
> RMSE
> Log -
> normal
> R²
> Log -
> normal
> RMSE
> Rosin -
> Rammler
> R²
> Rosin -
> Rammler
> RMSE
> Modified
> Rosin -
> Rammler R²
> Modified Rosin
> Rammler
> RMSE
> 10.5173 0.0294 0.7688 0.02035 0.9865 0.04012 0.9844 0.04308
> 20.5244 0.02991 0.7735 0.02064 0.9852 0.04247 0.983 00.04544
> 30.5898 0.02571 0.8261 0.01674 0.9852 0.043 00 0.9826 0.04655
> 40.6237 0.02415 0.8618 0.01464 0.9906 0.03502 0.9891 0.03769
> 50.6226 0.02437 0.8596 0.01486 0.9863 0.04019 0.9842 0.04318
> 60.6033 0.02563 0.8423 0.01616 0.9854 0.04239 0.9829 0.04585
> 70.5884 0.02670 0.8347 0.01691 0.9817 0.04683 0.9786 0.0507 0
> 80.4961 0.03198 0.7371 0.02310 0.9807 0.04698 0.9789 0.04914
> 90.6092 0.02633 0.855 00.01604 0.986 00.04193 0.9842 0.04447
> 10 0.5365 0.02751 0.7924 0.01841 0.9884 0.0383 00.9861 0.04203
> 11 0.6675 0.02293 0.8619 0.01477 0.9966 0.02114 0.9961 0.0226 0
> 12 0.6631 0.02299 0.8217 0.01673 0.9957 0.02362 0.995 00.02538
> 13 0.5106 0.03091 0.7631 0.02150 0.9835 0.04432 0.9807 0.04789
> 14 0.6893 0.02380 0.8675 0.01554 0.9784 0.04871 0.9753 0.05211
> 15 0.6403 0.02591 0.8403 0.01727 0.9943 0.02663 0.9938 0.02785
> 16 0.734 00.01907 0.6658 0.02137 0.997 00.01937 0.9966 0.0207 0

42          

> (a) (b)
> (c) (d)
> FIG 22 .Comparison of measured droplet size distributions with Normal, Log -Normal ,and Rosin -Ramler fits for C ase s6
> and 11.

The Rosin -Ramler distribution is a widely used empirical model for characterizing droplet size 

distributions in spray atomization, using a two -parameter model (scale and shape parameters) to represent 

cumulative volume fractions effectively . In Cases 6 (R² = 0.9854, RMSE = 0.0424) and 11 (R² = 0.9966, RMSE 

= 0.0211), it captures the overall trend particularly well for intermediate and large droplet sizes, as evident from 

its close alignment with the simulation data. Across all 16 cases, the classical Rosin –Rammler fit achieves R² 

values from 0.981 to 0.997 and RMSE between 0.019 and 0.049, whereas the Modified Rosin –Rammler yields 

slightly lower R² (0.978 –0.996) and marginally higher RMSE (0.021 –0.052). While both forms far outperform 

the normal and log -normal models in cumulative‐volume correlation, their point -wise PDF errors are roughly 1.5 –

2× larger than the log -normal R MSE (0.0146 –0.0231), reflecting minor local deviations around sharp peaks and 

tails. 43 

While the standard Rosin –Rammler model may underpredict the smallest droplets due to limited skewness 

control , it still provides sufficient flexibility for these datasets, and the modified RR model introduces no 

appreciable improvement with additional parameters or modification in the exponents. This absence of difference 

is likely to stem from : (1) the minimal skewness in the measured droplet size spectra , which already is fitting well 

within the st andard Rosin -Ramler assumptions, (2) the standard two -parameter model is adequate to capture the 

dominant atomization physics here , rendering additional modifications unnecessary. In summary, the classical 

Rosin –Rammler distribution’s inherent suitability and superior R²/RMSE performance render the modified 

version unnecessary for our LJICF spray data. For future work, alternative models such as Nukiyama –Tanasawa 

or upper -limit fun ctions could be explored to refine tail‐behavior predictions further and deepen our understanding 

of the atomization process. 

V. CONCLUSION 

This study presents a detailed analysis of droplet size distribution (DSD) in Liquid Jet in Crossflow (LJICF) 

systems, employing a robust VOF -LPT coupled framework. The computational model is rigorously validated 

against experimental data, demonstrating an average error below 10% for SMD predictions, underscoring its 

predictive reliability in spray atomization studies. The results reveal the significant impact of momentum flux 

ratio, Weber number, crossflow pressure, and velocity on atomization efficiency ( D₃₂), droplet distribution (PDPs 

and CDPs), and downstream behavior. Key outcomes include: 

▪ Larger droplets significantly influence droplet size characteristics, particularly the Sauter mean diameter 

(D 32 ), as observed from the CDPs and PDPs . In high -momentum flux cases (Cases 11 and 12), jet penetration 

and impingement influence droplet breakup . However, computational predictions show limited sensitivity to 

further velocity increases due to the lower cutoff in the VOF -LPT coupling . Higher velocities reduce droplet 

size standard deviation, indicating a more uniform DSD . Increased momentum flux ratios produce finer, more 

uniform droplets, as evident from steeper CDP curves and reduced STD .

▪ Higher crossflow pressures and velocities amplify aerodynamic forces, shifting the DSD towards smaller 

diameters and promoting efficient atomization , which is crucial for fuel -air mixing and related applications .

This induces Kelvin -Helmholtz instabilities, promoting enhanced primary breakup and transitioning from 

Rayleigh -Taylor to shear -dominated breakup, resulting in narrower size distributions and smaller mean 

droplet diameters (D 32 ). 44 

▪ Droplet sizes stabilize downstream, with higher jet velocities and crossflow parameters (V air , P ressure )

attaining quicker stabilization , producing smaller, more uniform droplets. 

▪ At low Weber numbers, with increasing momentum flux ratio ( q), the droplet breakup is dominated by inertial 

and surface tension forces, resulting in minimal variation in D0.999 . At high Weber numbers , stronger 

aerodynamic forces enhance atomization and increas e D0.999 sensitivity to momentum flux ratio (q), with 

significant reductions as q rises. 

▪ Increased aerodynamic forces at higher crossflow pressures and velocities accelerate the breakup process, 

shortening the breakup location and leading to improved droplet uniformity further downstream. 

▪ Droplet number density analysis reveals that increased jet velocities and crossflow parameters improve 

atomization but reduce droplet residence time and alter distribution. Elevated crossflow pressures intensify 

droplet deformation, delaying the Eulerian -to -Lagrangian conversion and causing spray plum e confinement. 

These factors, plume confinement, delayed particle conversion, and shorter residence time , collectively lead 

to the observed reduction in droplet density at elevated crossflow pressures. 

▪ The Log -Normal distribution outperforms the Normal distribution in fitting droplet size data, as it effectively 

captures the skewness and tail behavior characteristic of atomization processes. In contrast, the Normal 

distribution provides a symmetric fit t hat is less accurate, particularly for asymmetric data. However, the Log -

Normal distribution does not replicate the sharp peaks observed in the data, which are attributed to simulation -

specific conversion criteria. 

▪ The Rosin -Ramler distribution effectively represents droplet size trends in Cases 6 and 11. The minimal 

differences between its standard and modified versions are due to the limited skewness of the datasets and 

the standard model's inherent flexibility. While the Rosin -Ramler distribution effecti vely characterizes 

intermediate and larger droplet sizes, it slig htly underestimates the smaller droplets. 

The synergistic effects of momentum flux ratio, crossflow conditions, and Weber number provide a robust 

framework for optimizing atomization. This study enhances the understanding of LJICF systems through validated 

models and parametric analyses, offering valuable insights in to tailoring spray atomization performance . Future 

work can extend this framework to investigate the impact of fluid viscosity, nozzle geometry, and evaporation 

effects on droplet dynamics, distribution , and atomization efficiency. 45 

Acknowledgments 

Financial support for this research is provided through the Science and Engineering Research Board, India, 

and the Department of Science and Technology (DST) under the National Supercomputing Mission (NSM), India. 

We acknowledge the National Supercomputing Mission (NSM) for providing computing resources of 'PARAM 

Sanganak ' at IIT Kanpur, which is implemented by C -DAC and supported by the Ministry of Electronics and 

Information Technology (MeitY) and Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India. Also, 

we would like to thank the computer center ( www.iitk.ac.in/cc  ) at IIT Kanpur for providing the re sources to carry 

out this work. 

# AUTHOR DECLARATIONS 

CONFLICT OF INTEREST 

The authors have no conflicts to disclose. 

DATA AVAILABILITY 

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable 

request.    

> APPENDIX A: MEAN DIAMETERS AND DISPERSION PARAMETERS

Representative diameters provide a concise means of characterizing droplet size distributions in sprays. 

Metrics such as the mass median diameter (D 0.5 ) and upper -percentile diameters (D 0.9 , D 0.999 ), are widely used in 

applications like fuel injection, spray cooling, and agriculture, where droplet size influences performance. 

Typically, a mean diameter and a dispersion measure are required to describe a distribution effectively. Several 

key representative diameters used to characterize droplet distributions based on volume are listed below: 

TABLE II. Description of various diameter symbols used in the present study 

Representative 

diameters  Description 

D0.1  Diameter at which 10% of the total liquid volume is in smaller droplets. 

D0.5  Mass Median Diameter (MMD): 50% of the total liquid volume is in smaller droplets. 

D0.632  Characteristic Mean Diameter: Diameter corresponding to 63.2% of the total liquid volume, related 

to cumulative distributions. 

D0.9  Diameter at which 90% of the total liquid volume is in smaller droplets. 

D0.999  Diameter at which 99.9% of the total liquid volume is in smaller droplets, indicating the distribution's 

tail, the largest droplet size present in the spray; an indicator of incomplete atomization or droplet 

coalescence downstream. 46  

> Dpeak Diameter at the peak of the frequency distribution curve, indicating the most common droplet size.

Additional key diameters include the Surface Mean Diameter ( D20 ), which emphasizes larger droplets and is 

crucial for surface -area -driven processes like evaporation and combustion, and the Volume Mean Diameter ( D30 ), 

important for volume conservation in applications such as fuel injection and flow control. 

Droplet size dispersion parameters offer valuable insights into the spread and variability of droplet sizes 

within a spray, which is crucial for optimizing atomization performance across applications. The Standard 

Deviation (STD) , derived as the square root of variance, provides a basic measure of droplet size spread, indicating 

how widely sizes vary within the distribution .28 The Droplet Uniformity Index (DUI) , proposed by Tate 58 ,

quantifies the degree of uniformity in droplet sizes, with higher values indicating a more consistent distribution. 

The Relative Span Factor (s ) measures the droplet size variability , with larger values indicating a broader 

dispersion, and is particularly useful for assessing sprays with diverse size distributions .58 Similarly, the 

Dispersion Boundary Factor (B ) quantifies the range between median and upper -bound droplet sizes, 

providing insight into distribution width and atomization efficiency. Additionally, the MMD/SMD ratio (Mass 

Median Diameter to Sauter Mean Diameter) is a commonly used metric for dispersion, as it highlights the balance 

between larger and smaller droplets, critical in applications such as combustion and coating where precise control 

of droplet size is ess ential. 

𝑆𝑇𝐷 = ∑ (𝐷 𝑖 −𝐷 10 )2 

> 𝑖
> 𝑁

(A1 )

𝐷𝑈𝐼 = ∑ 𝑉 𝑖 (𝐷 0.5−𝐷 𝑖 )𝑖 

> 𝐷 0.5

(A2 )

𝛥 𝑠 = 𝐷 0.9−𝐷 0.1

> 𝐷 0.5

(A3 )

𝛥 𝐵 = 𝐷 0.999 −𝐷 0.5

> 𝐷 0.5

(A4 )

In jet -in -crossflow systems, primary and secondary breakup shape the size distribution of the spray . Key 

factors include the Weber number (We) and momentum flux ratio (q), which influence jet penetration, droplet 

formation , and the size of the resulting spray plume . Diameters like D₂₁ and D₃₂ capture the effects of inertia, 

surface tension, and drag, with D 32 being particularly important as it indicates how efficiently droplets can 

ev aporate during spray injection. 47  

> APPENDIX B: DISTRIBUTION FUNCTIONS

Standard distribution functions such as Normal , Log -Normal , and Log -Hyperbolic models facilitate 

comparisons between theoretical predictions and experimental data by smoothing statistical fluctuations. The 

normal distribution describes the random occurrence of a given drop size and applies to unbiased, random 

processes. It is expressed as a number distribution function: 

𝑓 (𝐷 ) = 1 

> 𝜎 √2𝜋

𝑒 [−(𝐷 −𝜇 )2  

> 2𝜎 2]

(B1 )

where μ is the mean diameter, σ is the standard deviation, and σ 2 is the variance. The standard normal curve has 

an area of 1 under the curve, equally split on either side of the y -axis. The integral of this curve gives the 

cumulative number distribution function. The l og -normal distribution is often used to model asymmetric 

distributions in sprays. Jet -in -crossflow atomization may produce such distributions due to non -uniform breakup 

and coalescence effects downstream , and is expressed as 

𝑓 (𝐷 ) = 1 

> √2𝜋 𝜎 𝐿𝑁 𝐷

𝑒 −[ln (𝐷 )−𝜇 𝐿𝑁 ]2 

> 2𝜎 𝐿𝑁 2

(B2 )

𝐷 10 = 𝑒 𝜇 𝐿𝑁 +𝜎 2𝐿𝑁 /2 (B3 )

𝑆𝑇 𝐷 2 = 𝑒 2𝜇 𝐿𝑁 +𝜎 2𝐿𝑁 (𝑒 𝜎 2𝐿𝑁 − 1) (B4 )

Empirical models, including the Rosin -Rammler Distribution 48 , Nukiyama -Tanasawa distribution 37 , and 

Upper -Limit Function 36 , are commonly used to model drop size distributions in atomized sprays . The Rosin -

Rammler distribution, which is widely used for single -peaked distributions, provides cumulative probabilities 

based on a characteristic droplet diameter and spread parameter , but is less effective for multipeaked distributions. 

The Rosin -Rammler Distribution assumes a cumulative distribution function (CDF): 

1 − 𝑄 = exp − (𝐷 /𝑋 )𝑞  (B5 )

where Q is the fraction of the total volume contained in drops of diameter less than D, X is the characteristic 

droplet diameter, and q is a constant that represents the spread of the distribution. This model is relevant for jet -

in -crossflow systems where secondary breakup leads to a predictable range of droplet sizes . A significant 

drawback of this distribution function is the inability to deal with multi ple -peaked distributions. However, it is 

quite useful for typical single -peaked results. 48 

REFERENCES  

> 1

Amighi , A. (2015). Liquid jets in crossflow at elevated temperatures and pressures . University of Toronto (Canada).  

> 2

Amighi, A., & Ashgriz, N. (2019). Global droplet size in liquid jet in a high -temperature and high -pressure crossflow. AIAA 

Journal , 57 (3), 1260 -1274.  https://doi.org/10.2514/1.J056496  

> 3

Amighi, A., & Ashgriz, N. (2019). Trajectory of a liquid jet in a high temperature and pressure gaseous cross flow. Journal 

of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power , 141 (6), 061019.  https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4042817  

> 4

Bai, B. F., Zhang, H. B., Liu, L., & Sun, H. J. (2009). Experimental study on turbulent mixing of spray droplets in 

crossflow. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science , 33 (6),1012 -1020.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2009.05.002  

> 5

Beale, J. C., & Reitz, R. D. (1999). Modeling spray atomization with the Kelvin -Helmholtz /Rayleigh -Taylor hybrid model. 

Atomization and sprays , 9(6). DOI:  10.1615/AtomizSpr.v9.i6.40  

> 6

Bhatia, B., Johny, T., & De, A. (2023). Understanding the liquid jet break -up in various regimes at elevated pressure using a 

compressible VOF -LPT coupled framework. International Journal of Multiphase Flow , 159 , 104303. 

DOI:  10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2022.104303  

> 7

Bhatia, B., Johny, T., & De, A. (2024). Primary Breakup Instability of Liquid Jet in Crossflow. Computational Thermal 

Sciences: An International Journal , 16 (2). DOI:  10.1615/ComputThermalScien.2023048933  

> 8

Bodoc, Virginel, Anthony Desclaux, Pierre Gajan, Frank Simon, and Geoffroy Illac . "Characterization of confined liquid jet 

injected into oscillating air crossflow." Flow, Turbulence and Combustion 104 (2020): 1-18. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10494 -019 -00037 -9 

> 9

Brackbill, J. U., Kothe, D. B., & Zemach, C. (1992). A continuum method for modeling surface tension. Journal of 

computational physics , 100 (2), 335 -354. DOI: 10.1016/0021 -9991(92)90240 -Y 

> 10

Broumand, M., & Birouk, M. (2019). Liquid jet primary breakup in a turbulent cross -airflow at low Weber number. Journal 

of fluid mechanics , 879 , 775 -792. DOI:  https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2019.704  

> 11

Chelliah, H. K. (2007). Flame inhibition/suppression by water mist: Droplet size/surface area, flame structure, and flow 

residence time effects. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute , 31 (2), 2711 -2719. DOI:  10.1016/j.proci.2006.07.133  

> 12

Chin, J. S., & Lefebvre, A. H. (1985). The role of the heat -up period in fuel drop evaporation. International Journal of Turbo 

and Jet Engines , 2(4), 315 -326.  https://doi.org/10.1515/TJJ.1985.2.4.315  

> 13

Crowe, C. T., Sharma, M. P., & Stock, D. E. (1977). The particle -source -in cell (PSI -CELL) model for gas -droplet flows. 

https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3448756  

> 14

Elghobashi , S., & Truesdell, G. (1993). On the two‐way interaction between homogeneous turbulence and dispersed solid 

particles. I: Turbulence modification. Physics of Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics , 5(7), 1790 -1801. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.858854  

> 15

Fan, S., Chen, S., Wu, Z., Wu, S., Chen, Y., Liu, D., ... & Huang, J. (2022).  Analysis of droplet size distribution and selection 

of spray parameters based on the fractal theory. Journal of Cleaner Production , 371 , 133315. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.133315  

> 16

Fansler, T. D., & Parrish, S. E. (2014). Spray measurement technology: a review. Measurement Science and 

Technology , 26 (1), 012002. DOI:  10.1088/0957 -0233/26/1/012002  

> 17

Farvardin, E., & Dolatabadi, A. (2012, September). Simulation of biodiesel jet in cross flow. In Proceedings of the 12th 

Triennial International Conference on Liquid Atomization and Spray Systems, Heidelberg, Germany (pp. 2 -6).  

> 18

Frössling, N. (1938). The Evaporating of Falling Drops (in German). Gerlands Beitrage zur Geophysik , 52:170 –216.  

> 19

Gosman, A. D., & Ioannides, E. (1981). Aspect of computer simulation of liquid -fuelled combustion. In AIAA 19th aerospace 

science meeting (pp. 81 -0323). McGraw Hill St Louis.  

> 20

Guildenbecher, D. R., López -Rivera, C., & Sojka, P. E. (2009). Secondary atomization. Experiments in Fluids , 46 (3), 371 -

402. DOI:  10.1007/s00348 -008 -0593 -2 

> 21

Heinrich, M., & Schwarze, R. (2020). 3D -coupling of Volume -of -Fluid and Lagrangian particle tracking for spray 

atomization simulation in OpenFOAM. SoftwareX , 11 , 100483. DOI:  10.1016/j.softx.2020.100483  

> 22

Herrmann, M. (2010). Detailed numerical simulations of the primary atomization of a turbulent liquid jet in crossflow. 

https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4000148  

> 23

Heywood, J. B. (1988). Internal combustion engine fundamentals. (No Title) . 

> 24

Hirt, C. W., & Nichols, B. D. (1981). Volume of fluid (VOF) method for the dynamics of free boundaries. Journal of 

computational physics , 39 (1), 201 -225. DOI:  10.1016/0021 -9991(81)90145 -5 

> 25

Johny, T., Bhatia, B., & De, A. (2024, June). Break -Up and Atomization Characteristics of N -Dodecane in High -Temperature 

Crossflow. In Turbo Expo: Power for Land, Sea, and Air (Vol. 87943, p. V03AT04A021). American Society of Mechanical 

Engineers. DOI:  10.1115/GT2024 -122860  

> 26

Kariuki, J., & Mastorakos, E. (2017). Experimental investigation of turbulent flames in uniform dispersions of ethanol 

droplets. Combustion and Flame , 179 , 95 -116.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.01.014  

> 27

Labergue, A., Gradeck, M., & Lemoine, F. (2015). Comparative study of the cooling of a hot temperature surface using 

sprays and liquid jets. International journal of heat and mass transfer , 81 , 889 -900. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2014.11.018 49  

> 28

Lefebvre, A. H., & McDonell, V. G. (2017). Atomization and sprays . CRC press.  https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315120911  

> 29

Li, X., & Soteriou, M. C. (2016). High fidelity simulation and analysis of liquid jet atomization in a gaseous crossflow at 

intermediate Weber numbers. Physics of Fluids , 28 (8).  https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4959290  

> 30

Lin, S. P., & Reitz, R. D. (1998). Drop and spray formation from a liquid jet. Annual review of fluid mechanics , 30 (1), 85 -

105.  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.fluid.30.1.85  

> 31

Linne, M. (2013). Imaging in the optically dense regions of a spray: A review of developing techniques. Progress in Energy 

and Combustion Science , 39 (5), 403 -440.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2013.06.001  

> 32

Madabhushi, R. K. (2003). A model for numerical simulation of breakup of a liquid jet in crossflow. Atomization and 

Sprays , 13 (4). DOI:  10.1615/AtomizSpr.v13.i4.30  

> 33

Madabhushi, R. K., Leong, M. Y., & Hautman, D. J. (2004, January). Simulation of the break -up of a liquid jet in crossflow 

at atmospheric conditions. In Turbo Expo: Power for Land, Sea, and Air (Vol. 41669, pp. 697 -704). 

https://doi.org/10.1115/GT2004 -54093  

> 34

Mashayek, A., & Ashgriz, N. (2011). Atomization of a liquid jet in a crossflow. Handbook of Atomization and Sprays: Theory 

and Applications , 657 -683.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4419 -7264 -4_29  

> 35

Miller, S. T., Jasak, H., Boger, D. A., Paterson, E. G., & Nedungadi, A. (2013).  A pressure -based, compressible, two -phase 

flow finite volume method for underwater explosions. Computers & Fluids , 87 , 132 -143. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compfluid.2013.04.002  

> 36

Mugele, R. A., & Evans, H. D. (1951). Droplet size distribution in sprays. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry , 43 (6), 1317 -

1324.  

> 37

Nukiyama, S. (1938). Y., Tanasawa,“ An Experiment on the Atomization of Liquid,” Trans. Soc. Mech. Engrs.(Japan) , 4, 138.  

> 38

OpenFOAM Foundation. (2019). OpenFOAM v1912: Open Source CFD Toolbox [Software].  https://openfoam.org . 

> 39

Pai, M. G., Bermejo -Moreno, I., Desjardins, O., & Pitsch, H. (2009). Role of Weber number in primary breakup of turbulent 

liquid jets in crossflow. Center for Turbulence Research Annual Research Briefs 2009 , 145 -158.  

> 40

Parmar, M., Haselbacher, A., & Balachandar, S. (2011). Generalized Basset -Boussinesq -Oseen equation for unsteady forces 

on a sphere in a compressible flow. Physical review letters , 106 (8), 084501. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.084501  

> 41

Pickett, L. M., Genzale, C. L., & Manin, J. (2015). Uncertainty quantification for liquid penetration of evaporating sprays a t

diesel -like conditions. Atomization and Sprays , 25 (5). DOI: 10.1615/AtomizSpr.2015010618  

> 42

Prakash, R. S., Sinha, A., Tomar, G., & Ravikrishna, R. V. (2018). Liquid jet in crossflow –effect of liquid entry 

conditions. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science , 93 , 45 -56.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2017.12.012  

> 43

Prakash, S. R., Jain, S. S., Lovett, J. A., Raghunandan, B. N., Ravikrishna, R. V., & Tomar, G. (2019). Detailed numerical 

simulations of atomization of a liquid jet in a swirling gas crossflow. Atomization and Sprays , 29 (7). 

DOI: 10.1615/AtomizSpr.2019031322  

> 44

Ranz, W., Marshall, W.: Evaporation from drops, part I. Chem. Eng. Prog. 48, 141 –146 (1952)  

> 45

Reitz, R. D. (1987). Modeling atomization processes in high -pressure vaporizing sprays. Atomisation Spray 

Technology , 3(4), 309 -337.  

> 46

Reitz, R. D., & Diwakar, R. (1987).  Structure of high -pressure fuel sprays. SAE transactions , 492 -509. 

https://www.jstor.org/stable/44718226  

> 47

Roenby, J., Bredmose, H., & Jasak, H. (2016).  A computational method for sharp interface advection. Royal Society open 

science , 3(11), 160405.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsos.160405  

> 48

Rosin, P. A. U. L. (1933). The laws governing the fineness of powdered coal. J. Inst. Fuel , 7(31), 29 -36.  

> 49

Saeedipour, M., Pirker, S., Bozorgi, S., & Schneiderbauer, S. (2016).  An Eulerian –Lagrangian hybrid model for the coarse -

grid simulation of turbulent liquid jet breakup. International Journal of Multiphase Flow , 82 , 17 -26. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2016.02.011  

> 50

Scardovelli, R., & Zaleski, S. (1999). Direct numerical simulation of free -surface and interfacial flow. Annual review of fluid 

mechanics , 31 (1), 567 -603.  

> 51

Schiller, L. (1933). A drag coefficient correlation. Zeit. Ver. Deutsch. Ing., 77, 318 -320.  

> 52

Schmidt, D. P., Rutland, C. J. (2000) A new droplet collision algorithm. Journal of Computational Physics 164.1: 62 -80. 

https://doi.org/10.1006/jcph.2000.6568  

> 53

Sellens, R. W., & Brzustowski, T. A. (1985). A prediction of the drop size distribution in a spray from first 

principles. Atomisation Spray Technology , 1(2), 89 -102.  

> 54

Sellens, R. W., & Brzustowski, T. A. (1986). A simplified prediction of droplet velocity distributions in a spray. Combustion 

and Flame , 65 (3), 273 -279.  https://doi.org/10.1016/0010 -2180(86)90041 -6 

> 55

Shinjo, J., & Umemura, A. (2010). Simulation of liquid jet primary breakup: Dynamics of ligament and droplet 

formation. International journal of multiphase Flow , 36 (7), 513 -532.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2010.03.008  

> 56

Ström, H., Sasic, S., Holm -Christensen, O., & Shah, L. J. (2016). Atomizing industrial gas -liquid flows –development of an 

efficient hybrid vof -lpt numerical framework. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow , 62 , 104 -113. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2016.08.007  

> 57

Tambe, S., Jeng, S. M., Mongia, H., & Hsiao, G. (2005, January). Liquid jets in subsonic crossflow. In 43rd AIAA Aerospace 

Sciences Meeting and Exhibit (p. 731).  https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2005 -731  

> 58

Tate, R. W. (1982). Some problems associated with the accurate representation of droplet size distributions. 50  

> 59

Tomar, G., Fuster, D., Zaleski, S., & Popinet, S. (2010). Multiscale simulations of primary atomization. Computers & 

Fluids , 39 (10), 1864 -1874.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compfluid.2010.06.018  

> 60

Xiao, F., Dianat, M., & McGuirk, J. J. (2013). Large eddy simulation of liquid -jet primary breakup in air crossflow. AIAA 

journal , 51 (12), 2878 -2893.  https://doi.org/10.2514/1.J052509  

> 61

Zhang, P., Li, W., Zhang, T., Yan, Y., Li, J., & Tang, H. (2023).  Multiscale modeling of liquid jet breakup in crossflow using 

an Eulerian/Lagrangian approach. Physics of Fluids , 35 (12).  https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0177032  

> 62

Zuo, B., Gomes, A. M., & Rutland, C. J. (2000). Modelling superheated fuel sprays and vaporization. International Journal 

of Engine Research, 1(4), 321 -336.  https://doi.org/10.1243/1468087001545218  

> 63

Kasmaiee, S., Tadjfar, M., Kasmaiee, S., & Ahmadi, G. (2025). Backward injection of liquid jets in crossflow. Physics of 

Fluids , 37 (4).  https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0262615  

> 64

Kasmaiee, S., Tadjfar, M., & Kasmaiee, S. (2025). Pressure swirl nozzles with different discharge orifice shapes injecting 

into transverse airflow. Physics of Fluids , 37 (1).  https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0252132  

> 65

Bossard, J. A., & Peck, R. E. (1996, January). Droplet si ze distribution effects in spray combustion. In Symposium 

(International) on Combustion (Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 1671 -1677). Elsevier.  https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082 -0784(96)80391 -2 

> 66

Guo, Z., Li, H., Dai, Q., & Chen, Z. (2024). Effects of droplet evaporation on turbulence characteristics in a 

supersonic mixing layer. Physics of Fluids , 36 (12).  https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0241297  

> 67

Pillai, A. L., Nagao, J., Awane, R., & Kurose, R. (2020). Influences of liquid fuel atomization and flow rate fluctuations on 

spray combustion instabilities in a backward -facing step combustor. Combustion and Flame , 220 , 337 -356. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.06.031